Network Working Group                                        J. Haluska 
Internet Draft                                                Telcordia 
Intended status: Informational                                 R. Ahern 
Expires: May 2011                    AT&T Customer Information Services 
                                                            Marty Cruze 
                                     Qwest Communications International 
                                                           C. Blackwell 
                                                                Verizon 
                                                       November 9, 2010 
                                    
 
                                      
    Considerations for Information Services and Operator Services Using 
                                    SIP 
             draft-haluska-sipping-directory-assistance-10.txt 


    

    

Status of this Memo 

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. This document may not be 
   modified, and derivative works of it may not be created, and it may 
   not be published except as an Internet-Draft. 

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with 
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. This document may not be 
   modified, and derivative works of it may not be created, except to 
   publish it as an RFC and to translate it into languages other than 
   English. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering 
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that 
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents 
   at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference 
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress." 


 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                   [Page 1] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 9, 2009. 

Copyright Notice 

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors. All rights reserved. 

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document. 

Abstract 

   Information Services are services whereby information is provided in 
   response to user requests, and may include involvement of a human or 
   automated agent. A popular existing Information Service is Directory 
   Assistance (DA). Moving ahead, Information Services providers 
   envision exciting multimedia services that support simultaneous 
   voice and data interactions with full operator backup at any time 
   during the call. Information Services providers are planning to 
   migrate to SIP based platforms, which will enable such advanced 
   services, while continuing to support traditional DA services.  

   Operator Services are traditional PSTN services which often involve 
   providing human or automated assistance to a caller, and often 
   require the specialized capabilities traditionally provided by an 
   operator services switch. Market and/or regulatory factors in some 
   jurisdictions dictate that some subset of Operator Services continue 
   to be provided going forward.  

   This document aims to identify how Operator and Information Services 
   can be implemented using existing or currently proposed SIP 
   mechanisms, to identity existing protocol gaps, and to provide a set 
   of Best Current Practices to facilitate interoperability. For 
   Operator Services, the intention is to describe how current operator 
   services can continue to be provided to PSTN based subscribers via a 
   SIP based operator services architecture. It also looks at how 
   current operator services might be provided to SIP based subscribers 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                   [Page 2] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   via such an architecture, but does not consider the larger question 
   of the need for or usefulness or suitability of each of these 
   services for SIP based subscribers. 

   This document addresses the needs of current Operator and 
   Information Services providers; as such, the intended audience 
   includes vendors of equipment and services to such providers. 

    

Table of Contents 

    
   1. Introduction...................................................4 
   2. Protocol Gaps..................................................7 
   3. Terminology....................................................7 
   4. High Level Requirements.......................................10 
      4.1. Potential Future Requirements............................13 
   5. Information Services..........................................13 
   6. Operator Services.............................................17 
      6.1. Inter Provider Capabilities..............................19 
      6.2. Inter OISP Capabilities..................................20 
      6.3. Intra OISP Capabilities..................................20 
      6.4. Capabilities Required for Specific Services..............21 
   7. OISP Internal Architecture....................................22 
   8. General Approach..............................................24 
   9. Signaling Mechanisms..........................................26 
      9.1. PSTN Protocol Interworking...............................26 
      9.2. Conveying Application Specific Information...............27 
      9.3. Calling Party's Identity.................................28 
      9.4. Provider Identification..................................30 
         9.4.1. Home Provider.......................................30 
         9.4.2. Intermediate Provider...............................31 
      9.5. Originating Line Information/ANI II Value................33 
      9.6. Trunk Group Identifier...................................34 
      9.7. Identification of PSTN Originated Calls..................35 
      9.8. Dialed Digits............................................36 
      9.9. Retargeting to Identify the Desired Service..............37 
      9.10. Charge Number...........................................37 
      9.11. Access Prefix...........................................38 
      9.12. Signaling of Carrier Information........................38 
      9.13. Transit Network Selection...............................40 
      9.14. Carrier Identification..................................42 
      9.15. Carrier Selection Information...........................42 
      9.16. Passing Whisper.........................................43 
      9.17. Calling Equipment Capabilities and Characteristics......46 
      9.18. Media Server Returning Data to the Application Server...47 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                   [Page 3] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

      9.19. Control of Cut Through Direction for PSTN Interworking..48 
      9.20. With Holding of Final Responses.........................49 
   10. Example Call Flow - Directory Assistance.....................49 
      10.1. Basic Flow..............................................49 
      10.2. OISP Drops Out at Call Completion Setup.................58 
      10.3. OISP Drops Out After Call Completion Call is Answered...60 
      10.4. OISP Drops Out After Interaction with Called Party......62 
      10.5. OISP Remains in Path....................................64 
      10.6. Return of Call to OISP..................................66 
      10.7. PSTN Origination........................................67 
      10.8. PSTN Termination........................................69 
      10.9. Call Completion By Releasing Call Back to PSTN..........71 
   11. Operator Services Example Call Flows.........................74 
      11.1. Network Controlled Coin Calls...........................74 
      11.2. Busy Line Verification and Interrupt....................81 
         11.2.1. PSTN Target........................................82 
         11.2.2. SIP Target.........................................84 
      11.3. Inward Calls............................................87 
      11.4. Intercept...............................................88 
         11.4.1. Intercept Request Via SIP..........................88 
         11.4.2. Intercept Request Via PSTN.........................91 
      11.5. Operator Assisted Collect Call..........................93 
      11.6. Operator Assisted Third Party Billing..................100 
   12. Summary and Conclusions.....................................104 
   13. Security Considerations.....................................105 
   14. IANA Considerations.........................................105 
   15. Acknowledgements............................................105 
   16. References..................................................106 
      16.1. Normative References...................................106 
      16.2. Informative References.................................106 
   Author's Addresses..............................................110 
    
1. Introduction 

   Information Services are services whereby information is provided in 
   response to user requests. This may include involvement of a human 
   or automated agent. Information Services may include call completion 
   to a requested telephone number and other extensions provided on 
   behalf of the owner of the information, such as assistance with 
   purchases. The users normally access the Information Services by 
   dialing an appropriate dialing sequence and verbally requesting an 
   operator or automated system for the information. Examples of such 
   dialing sequences for directory assistance currently include ''411'' 
   or ''1-NPA-555-1212'' in North America, or ''118xxx'' in many European 
   countries. Dialing sequences for operator services in North America 
   often include ''0'' either by itself or as a prefix. In Europe the 
   dialing sequence varies by country, but may include ''00'', or ''100'' 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                   [Page 4] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   plus additional digits depending on the service being requested. The 
   users may also request information through other access methods, 
   such as chat (IM), email, Web (HTTP) or SMS initiated requests. The 
   Information may be delivered to the user via any mode, such as 
   verbal announcements, chat (IM), email, Web (HTTP), MMS, or SMS.  

   A popular existing Information Service is Directory Assistance (DA). 
   DA is a well known service in today's PSTN, and is generally 
   identified with "411" or "NPA-555-1212" type services in North 
   America. Today's DA services provide a user with telephone number 
   associated with a name and locality provided by the user, can 
   complete the call for the user, and can send SMS with the listing to 
   the user's wireless phone. Other Information Services provide the 
   user with a wide range of information, such as movie listings and 
   the weather. 

   Moving ahead, Information Services providers envision exciting 
   multimedia services that support simultaneous voice and data 
   interactions with full operator backup at any time during the call. 
   For instance, a directions Information Service may announce and 
   display directions to the requested listing, with the option for the 
   caller to request transfer to an operator with the latest call 
   context information. 

   Operator Services are traditional PSTN services which often involve 
   providing human or automated assistance to a caller, and often 
   require the specialized capabilities traditionally provided by an 
   operator services switch. Market and/or regulatory factors in some 
   jurisdictions dictate that some subset of Operator Services continue 
   to be provided going forward. Some examples of such services include 
   collect calls, third party billed calls, and busy line verification.  

   Operator and Information Services providers are planning to migrate 
   to SIP based platforms, which will enable such advanced services, 
   while continuing to support traditional DA services.  

   Implementing Operator and Information Services with SIP will require 
   the exchange of certain information, and possibly the use of 
   specialized capabilities which are not normally required for other 
   types of calls. This document aims to identify such information, and 
   stimulate discussion about how this information could be exchanged. 
   Existing mechanisms will be used where appropriate, and currently 
   existing proposals will be favored over new extensions.  

   Some of the services discussed in this document are based on 
   Operator Services offered in North America. Also, many of the 
   signaling issues described are based on North American PSTN 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                   [Page 5] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   signaling. However, the ideas in this document are not intended to 
   be exclusive to North America, and are intended to be useful in 
   other environments as well. 

   For Operator Services, the intention is to describe how current 
   operator services can continue to be provided to PSTN based 
   subscribers via a SIP based operator services architecture. It also 
   looks at how current operator services might be provided to SIP 
   based subscribers via such an architecture, but does not consider 
   the larger question of the need for or usefulness or suitability of 
   each of these services in such an environment. Specifically, many of 
   the constraints and assumptions regarding access to wireline 
   services via a copper loop, under which services such as Busy Line 
   Verification, Interrupt, and services where the operator controls 
   the ''line'' make sense, do not have natural parallels in a SIP based 
   environment. Some of these services are treated here for 
   completeness. 

   A basic architecture utilizing an application server as the primary 
   controller, performing third party call control to route incoming 
   calls among media servers, operator workstations, etc. is described. 
   Interface to the PSTN is described using PSTN gateways which 
   interwork between ISUP or MF signaling and SIP. 

   Operator services in the North American PSTN often utilize MF 
   trunks. As there is currently no specific specification for MF/SIP 
   interworking, we assume that the PSTN gateway performs an internal 
   MF to ISUP translation. 

   The use of existing SIP mechanisms is described where possible. Some 
   of the main mechanisms described include third party call control, 
   the REFER method with several extensions (e.g. Replaces), the Join 
   header, Netann, and some of the ongoing work in the MEDIACTRL 
   working group. 

   It is assumed that appropriate business relationships are in place 
   between involved providers, and that the providers involved have 
   trust relationships as described in [RFC3325]. In other words, this 
   document does not assume general operation on the open internet, but 
   rather between sets of providers with appropriate business and trust 
   relationships. Individual providers may decide to provide handling 
   for other requests, but this is beyond the scope of this document. 

    



 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                   [Page 6] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

2. Protocol Gaps 

As indicated above, one of the purposes of this document is to identify 
gaps in existing protocols, with respect to implementing Directory 
Assistance and Operator Services in SIP. Several gaps have been 
identified, and these are listed in this section of the document for 
convenience to the reader. These include: 

   o  Originating Line Information/ANI II Digits 

   o  Charge Number 

   o  Coin Deposit Tones 

   o  Carrier Information: ISUP TNS, CIP, and CSI parameters, and 
      ''cic'', ''dai'' tel URI parameters 

    

3. Terminology 

   This section defines terms that will be used to discuss Information 
   and Operator Services.  

   "0-" (''zero minus'') Dialing - Invocation of Operator Services by 
   dialing "0" with no further digits. 

   "0+" (''Zero Plus'') Dialing - Invocation of Operator Services by 
   dialing "0" followed by a phone number. 

   Application Server (AS) - An Application Server is a server 
   providing value added services. It controls SIP sessions on behalf 
   of the services supported by the service provider's network.  

   Back End Automation - Back End Automation refers to automation of 
   the function that provides listing information to the caller. This 
   includes playing a verbal announcement with the listing information, 
   and may also include prompting the user for additional service 
   requests (e.g., call completion service).  

   Branding - Branding is a service where customized announcements are 
   provided to the caller to identify the service provider. For 
   example, if the service is provided to a Home Provider's subscribers 
   by a third party provider, branded service might include a message 
   thanking them for using that Home Provider. Thus the user experience 
   is that the service is provided by their Home Provider rather than 
   some third party. Branding can be influenced by a number of factors, 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                   [Page 7] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   including but not limited to the identity of the caller's Home 
   Provider, or of other providers involved in the call.  

   Call Completion - Call Completion is a service where a call is 
   initiated by the provider on behalf of the user. For example, in the 
   DA service, once the DA provider has identified the requested 
   listing, it may offer to complete the call for the caller, usually 
   for some additional fee. This relieves the user from having to 
   remember the number and then dial it. 

   DA Provider - The DA provider is the provider of DA services to end 
   users. Since DA services are a subset of IS services, a DA provider 
   is also an IS provider, and the definition of IS provider holds true 
   for DA provider, except that the scope of services is limited to DA 
   services. 

   Front End Automation - Front End Automation refers to automation of 
   the initial customer contact, whereby a branded announcement may be 
   played, a prompt is played to the user, and the user's spoken 
   request is recorded. Speech recognition and querying for the listing 
   information are performed as part of front end automation. 

   Home Provider - The service provider who is responsible for 
   providing voice services to the calling customer. This is the 
   service provider that has the business relationship with the calling 
   customer. The identity of the home provider influences call 
   processing treatment, such as branding and operator queue selection. 

   Home Subscriber Server (HSS) - The Home Subscriber Server is an IMS 
   network element similar to a Home Location Register. It is a 
   database containing information about the subscriber, user 
   equipment, filter criteria for call processing triggers, etc.  

   Information Services (IS) Provider - The IS provider is the provider 
   of Information Services to end users. The Information Services 
   provider provides retail services directly to end users, and 
   provides wholesale services to other service providers.  

   Intermediate Provider - In the context of this document, an 
   Intermediate Provider is a provider which has agreements with home 
   providers to handle OIS requests, and with OISPs which actually 
   provide the requested services. Note that some home providers will 
   have direct relationships with OISPs, rather than using an 
   Intermediate Provider. Intermediate Providers are the targets of SIP 
   requests from home providers since they are involved when a home 
   provider does not have a direct relationship with an OISP. 
   Intermediate Providers perform retargeting of received SIP requests 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                   [Page 8] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   toward the OISP. Intermediate providers make service level 
   decisions, such as receiving requests for a service (such as DA 
   calls) from other networks, deciding which provider will actually 
   provide the service, and forwarding the request to that provider, 
   retargeting the Request-URI as necessary. 

   Layer 3 connectivity - This refers to IP connectivity, for example 
   as provided by an Internet Service Provider or Managed IP service 
   provider. If one entity has Layer 3 connectivity to another entity, 
   then it can route packets to that entity. This does not imply 
   anything about any physical path between the entities. Nor does it 
   imply any application layer connectivity between the entities. 

   Media Server - A Media Server is a general-purpose platform for 
   executing real-time media processing tasks. Examples of typical 
   functions performed by media servers include playing announcements, 
   collecting speech and/or DTMF digits, and performing conferencing 
   functions. 

   Operator and Information Services Provider (OISP) - In this 
   document, this term refers to an Information Services Provider, 
   Directory Assistance Provider, or Operator Services Provider, 
   depending on the context. This term is used for brevity. We are also 
   defining this to be an adjective, thus "OISP services" is a 
   convenient, intuitive way to say "Operator and Information 
   Services". 

   Operator Services - Traditional PSTN services which often involve 
   providing human or automated assistance to a caller, and often 
   require the specialized capabilities traditionally provided by an 
   operator services switch. Some examples of such services include 
   collect calls, third party billed calls, and busy line verification.  

   Retail OIS service - A retail OIS service is one which is provided 
   to a user by the user's Home Provider.  

   SIP Layer connectivity - When two SIP service providers interconnect 
   for the purpose of exchanging SIP sessions or calls, they are said 
   to have SIP layer connectivity to one another.  

   Time Division Multiplexed (TDM) Local Exchange Carriers (LECs) - 
   ATDM LEC provides local exchange service to end users utilizing TDM-
   based switching systems. 

   Transit Provider - In the context of this document, a transit 
   provider simply "moves calls", and has no concept of OIS services. 
   It may perform SIP rerouting of the request, but does not perform 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                   [Page 9] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   SIP retargeting. Such a provider is used when a provider cannot 
   directly route calls to another provider. For example, an 
   Intermediate Provider might use a Transit Provider if for some 
   reason (e.g. error condition) it cannot route a call directly to an 
   OISP. This is in contrast to an Intermediate Provider (see 
   definition earlier in this section). 

   Whisper - During front end automation, the OIS-MS will record and 
   may time compress the caller's perhaps meandering speech into what 
   is known as the "Whisper". This is intended to be played into a 
   human operator's ear, should the call be referred to an operator, to 
   avoid the operator from having to prompt the caller again. The 
   whisper is obtained during the front end automation, and saved as an 
   audio file. 

   Wholesale OIS service -A Wholesale OIS Service is one which is 
   provided to a user by a Service Provider other than the user's Home 
   Provider. 

   Zero Minus ("0-") Dialing - Invocation of Operator Services by 
   dialing "0" with no further digits. 

   Zero Plus ("0+") Dialing - Invocation of Operator Services by 
   dialing "0" followed by a phone number. 

    

4. High Level Requirements 

   In addition to all-IP scenarios, it must be possible to support 
   interworking with existing PSTN and wireless based providers, via 
   both SS7 and MF interconnections. 

   It must be possible to support collection of usage information. This 
   includes both online and offline usage information. It must be 
   possible to perform usage collection for all actions associated with 
   a particular call, and further to be able to correlate actions 
   across multiple provider elements and across providers.  

   It must be possible to support multiple Operator and Information 
   Services Providers (OISPs) per originating provider. The choice as 
   to which OISP to be used could be on a per subscriber basis, or on 
   other criteria. 

   It must be possible to support multiple OISP providers per call. For 
   example, one provider might be used for front end automation, and 
   another used for operator assistance. 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 10] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   It must be possible to provide an automated announcement to the 
   user, and prompt the user for the type of query and query 
   information. 

   It must be possible to pass a "whisper" to the operator workstation. 

   It must be possible to connect the user to a human operator. 

   It must be possible to provide an automated announcement of the 
   requested information. 

   It must be possible to prompt the user for call completion. 

   It must be possible to perform call completion. 

   It must be possible to support the case where OIS services are 
   provided by the caller's Home Provider. This scenario is known in 
   the OIS industry as the Retail scenario. In this case, the caller's 
   Home Provider is also an OISP, and provides OIS service to its own 
   subscribers. This is illustrated in the following figure: 

   +--------+    +--------------------+ 
   | Caller |----| Home      +------+ | 
   |        |    | Provider  | OISP | | 
   |        |    |           +------+ | 
   +--------+    +--------------------+ 
    
                Figure 1 Services Provider by Home Provider 

    

   It must be possible to support the case where OIS services are 
   provided by a direct third party provider. In this scenario, the 
   OISP is a third party service provider, and there is direct SIP 
   layer connectivity as well as business relationships between the 
   calling user's provider and the OISP. This is illustrated in the 
   following figure: 

   +--------+    +----------+   +------+ 
   | Caller |----| Home     |---| OISP | 
   |        |    | Provider |   |      | 
   +--------+    +----------+   +------| 
 

        Figure 2 Services Provider by a Direct Third Party Provider 

    
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 11] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   It must be possible to support the case where services are provided 
   by an indirect third party provider. In this scenario, the OISP is a 
   third party provider, but the caller's Home Provider does not have 
   direct SIP connectivity to the OISP. Further, it's possible that it 
   has no business relationship with the OISP. The caller's provider 
   routes the call to a provider with whom it does have a relationship, 
   referred to in this document as an "intermediate provider", and this 
   intermediate provider in turn routes either to the OISP, with which 
   it has a relationship, or there could be multiple intermediate 
   providers. This is illustrated in the following figure: 

   +--------+    +--------+   +---------+   +------+    
   | Caller |    |Home    |   | Inter-  |   | OISP | 
   |        |----|Provider|---| mediate |---|      | 
   |        |    |        |   | Provider|   |      | 
   |        |    |  (A)   |   |   (B)   |   |  (C) | 
   +--------+    +--------+   +---------+   +------+ 
    
      Figure 3 Services Provided by an Indirect Third Party Provider 

    

   It must be possible to support the case where transit providers are 
   included between any other providers involved in the call. The 
   transit provider only "moves calls" between other providers, and is 
   involved in no other way with OIS services. I.e., it simply forwards 
   the call towards the destination, without making any service level 
   decisions, in contrast to an Intermediate provider as described 
   previously. This is illustrated in the following figure: 

   +--------+    +--------+   +--------+   +---------+   +------+    
   | Caller |    |Home    |   |Transit |   | Inter-  |   | OISP | 
   |        |----|Provider|---|Provider|---| mediate |---|      | 
   |        |    |        |   |        |   | Provider|   |      | 
   |        |    |  (A)   |   |  (B)   |   |   (C)   |   |  (D) | 
   +--------+    +--------+   +--------+   +---------+   +------+ 
    
                Figure 4 Involvement of a Transit Provider 

    

   It must be possible to support both Information Services as well as 
   Operator Services. Examples of Operator services include Operator 
   Intercept, Busy Line Verification, Call Restrictions, etc. 

    

 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 12] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

4.1. Potential Future Requirements 

   The following are potential future requirements. 

   Operation via the general internet, not specific to any particular 
   SDO's architecture, and not depending on any protocol extensions 
   specific to those architectures, should be supported. 

   It must be possible to support non voice initiated Information 
   Services requests. Possible examples include chat (IM), email, Web 
   (HTTP) or SMS initiated requests. In the case that the subscriber 
   makes a purchase via some online auction service, that subscriber 
   can via IM or email request the assistance of an operator. 

   It must be possible to provide an application interface to other 
   types of systems. An example could be a web based API, so that once 
   some online search engine has located some business listing, the 
   services of the Information Services provider could be invoked by 
   the user from the web page. 

   It must be possible to support IPTV interactive services. As 
   multiple services such as IM and telephony are integrated with IPTV, 
   it must be possible to initiate Information Services requests in 
   this context as well. 

    

5. Information Services 

   Information Services (IS) are services whereby information is 
   provided in response to user requests. This may include involvement 
   of a human or automated agent. Usually, the user accesses the 
   Information Service by placing a voice call to the automated 
   Information Service and verbally requests the information, such as 
   phone number, movie listings, weather, etc. Frequently, a live 
   operator is attached to recognize the user's verbal request. 
   Sometimes, the user can utilize other access methods, such as SMS, 
   IM, or HTTP-initiated requests. These additional methods are not 
   currently covered in this document. 

   Information Services are often provided on a wholesale basis to Home 
   Providers, and include features such as branded announcements.  

   Directory Assistance (DA) is a specific type of Information Service 
   whereby end users request a telephone number for an entity.  


 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 13] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   Purchase services and Concierge services facilitate the Information 
   Services operator providing assistance to the caller after the 
   listing has been announced and perhaps call completion performed. 
   The call is routed to an Information Services operator who interacts 
   with the customer, offering to help make a purchase. Concierge 
   service is similar; the Information Services operator offers to make 
   e.g. restaurant reservations for the caller.  

   The following represents a list of representative steps taken during 
   the course of a typical DA request and identifies a set of required 
   high level capabilities. 

   1. Initial recognition of an OIS call. At some point, the call needs 
   to be identified as an OIS call, and appropriate routing or other 
   logic must be invoked in order to fulfill the request. This could be 
   based on any number of criteria, including but not limited to 
   analysis of the "address information" - e.g. the digits or Request-
   URI emitted by the caller's UA. This could occur at any number of 
   places - e.g. in the caller's UA, in a proxy in the home provider, 
   or in some downstream element. 

   2. Identification of the requested service. There are many possible 
   OIS services, and the number of these is only expected to increase 
   as providers respond to customer needs. At some point during call 
   processing it is necessary to identify exactly which service is 
   desired. For example "directory assistance with call completion" is 
   a service where after the listing information is provided to the 
   caller, the option is provided for the call to be placed 
   automatically, so the customer need not hang up, remember the 
   digits, and dial the number. Another example is "directory 
   assistance only", where call completion is not offered. There are 
   multiple factors which could affect the service which is to be 
   offered, and the logic deciding this could be located anywhere along 
   the path to the OIS provider. Some of the information required to 
   make such decisions could include: 

     o   The digits dialed by the caller.  

     o   The Request-URI emitted by the caller's UA. 

     o   The identity of the calling party, for instance the calling 
        party number.  

     o   The charge number associated with the caller's account. 

     o   The identity of the calling party's home provider. 

 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 14] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

     o   The identity of the provider which directly hands off the call 
        to the OISP.  

     o   The identity of other provider which the request might 
        traverse 

     o   The Originating Station Type, in case the call was originated 
        in the PSTN. 

     o   Trunk group information, in case the call was originated in 
        the PSTN. 

     o   Capabilities and characteristics of the caller's user 
        equipment. 

                    

   3. Routing of the OIS call. The call must be routed towards an 
   entity which can provide the requested service. Each entity or 
   network handling the call routes it based on the logic located in 
   that provider, and the information currently available. For 
   instance, the home provider may know very little about OIS services, 
   having farmed that service out to another provider. Consequently it 
   might simply route all such calls towards the OIS provider, which 
   decides which service is to be offered. 

   4. Authentication. When one provider passes a call to another 
   provider, there is a need for the providers involved to be sure of 
   each other's identity. This might be through explicit security 
   mechanisms such as mutual TLS or security gateways using IPSec 
   tunnel mode, it might be through reliance on a closed set of trusted 
   interconnected providers, or some other policy set by the providers 
   involved. 

   5. Receipt of the OIS call. The OIS provider needs to be able to 
   receive such calls. 

   6. Querying upstream providers for information. The OISP, or an 
   intermediate provider may require information from an upstream 
   provider. For instance, the capabilities and characteristics of the 
   caller's equipment may be needed in order to influence call 
   processing. 

   7. Selection of automated voice platform. When it has been 
   determined that the call must be routed to an automated voice 
   platform, there are a number of factors to be taken into account to 
   determine an appropriate, available platform for the call. It must 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 15] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   be possible to determine an appropriate, available automated voice 
   platform to which the call should be routed. 

   8. Connection of caller to automated voice platform. The OISP must 
   be able to connect the caller to an appropriate automated voice 
   platform. 

   9. Provision of branded announcements. The OISP must be capable of 
   providing custom announcements to the caller based on a number of 
   criteria. For example, it might greet the caller, thanking them for 
   using their Home Provider's service. Though the service is actually 
   provided by the OISP, business arrangements would dictate such 
   branded announcements. 

   10. Query the caller. The OISP must be capable of playing a voice 
   request to the customer asking them for the listing. For example 
   "Name and city, please." 

   11. Recording a spoken request. The OISP must be capable of 
   recording the caller's spoken request. This both for speech 
   recognition, and also for playing back the "whisper" to a human 
   operator should one be required, to prevent having to ask the 
   customer to repeat the request. 

   12. Speech recognition. The OISP must be able to pass the caller's 
   spoken request to speech recognition system, suitable for querying a 
   listing database. 

   13. Listing database query. The OISP must be capable of querying one 
   or more listings databases using the request. 

   14. Decide to use human operator if listing query fails. If the 
   listing query fails, or the speech recognition fails, the OISP must 
   be able to decide to send the call to a human operator. 

   15. Selection of appropriate operator. When it has been determined 
   that the call must be routed to a human operator, there are a number 
   of factors to be taken into account to determine the appropriate 
   operator for the call. It must be possible to determine an 
   available, appropriate human operator to which the call should be 
   routed. 

   16. Routing of call to operator workstation. Once the appropriate 
   operator has been identified, the call must be routed to that 
   operator's workstation. 


 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 16] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   17. Whisper. Once the operator answers the call, the previously 
   recorded request should be played to the operator as a "whisper", 
   prior to connecting the caller to the operator. 

   18. Connection of caller to operator. Once the operator has heard 
   the whisper, the caller can be connected to the human operator. The 
   operator queries the caller for the request, and initiates a query 
   to the listing database.  

   19. Playing listing information. Once the listing information is 
   returned from the database, the caller must be connected to a media 
   resource which speaks the listing information to the caller. 

   20. Prompting for call completion. If the identified service 
   includes call completion, the caller should be prompted for this 
   service, for example by pressing some DTMF key. In such a case, the 
   AS would instruct the MS to prompt the user, and collect any DTMF 
   stimulus from the user. The MS would do so, and would report back to 
   the AS whether the DTMF stimulus was received. 

   21. Call completion. If the caller requests call completion, the 
   call should be automatically initiated for the caller. 

    

6. Operator Services 

   Operator Services are traditional PSTN services which often involve 
   providing human or automated assistance to a caller, and often 
   require the specialized capabilities traditionally provided by an 
   operator services switch. Market and/or regulatory factors in some 
   jurisdictions dictate that some subset of Operator Services continue 
   to be provided going forward.  

   This document assumes an architecture with SIP based OISPs, SIP 
   based home providers, and SIP based end users. Since it is necessary 
   to maintain backward compatibility with traditional TDM based 
   providers and end users, these are also considered. It may not be 
   necessary, desirable, or technically feasible to support every 
   existing Operator Service using SIP, or to support both SIP and TDM 
   based end users for all Operator Services. This is the subject of 
   ongoing investigation, and the current iteration of this document 
   assumes that both SIP and TDM based home providers and end users are 
   in scope for these services, unless specifically indicated to the 
   contrary. A future revision may update this assumption based on the 
   findings of the investigation. 

 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 17] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   With respect to Operator Services, this iteration of this document 
   intends to provide an introduction to and descriptions of some of 
   these services, as well as provide some high level requirements. It 
   is intended that the subsequent iteration will build upon this, 
   providing more detailed requirements, suggested SIP mechanisms, and 
   more call flows. 

   Operator Services are typically provided by the requesting party's 
   OISP. In some cases, such as Busy Line Verification, the target or 
   called party's OISP may be involved as well. 

   Next, several traditional Operator Services will be described. As 
   indicated above, the current iteration of this document is silent 
   regarding which of these may or may not be candidates for 
   implementation with SIP, or towards SIP end users. Note that unless 
   specifically indicated, most of these services are traditionally 
   provided by the caller's OISP. 

   Operator Assistance. This allows the caller to perform either "zero 
   minus" or "zero plus" dialing to be connected to a human or 
   automated system for assistance with the call.  

   Collect calls. This allows the caller to request that the called 
   party accept the charges for the call. Typically an OISP utilizes a 
   human operator or automated system to provide this service.  

   Rate Quotes. This allows the caller to request a quote for the cost 
   or rate for specific calls.  

   Third party billed calls. This allows the caller to request that a 
   third party (different than the calling or called party) be 
   contacted and requested to accept charges for the call (although in 
   some limited cases, contacting the third party is not necessary).  

   Busy Line Verification and Interrupt. This allows a caller to have 
   the OISP determine whether a target line is in use, and if so, to 
   "barge in" to the conversation and request whether the target party 
   is willing to accept a call from the caller. This service is 
   initially handled by the caller's OISP, which then contacts the 
   target party's OISP, which is able to perform the verification and 
   interrupt on the target party. 

   Coin Calls. Operator services systems must be able to control TDM-
   based network controlled coin stations (payphones). This includes 
   monitoring of coin deposit tones (to verify payment) sent from the 
   coin station, as well as sending supervision (control) signals to 
   the coin station. Network controlled coin stations are connected to 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 18] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   TDM based end offices via specialized phone lines which support the 
   required signaling. These end offices, in turn, connect to TDM based 
   OISPs using specialized trunks capable of conveying the coin 
   signaling. The OISP monitors and controls the coin station via these 
   trunks. "Smart" coin stations perform coin detection locally and do 
   not require network control, and are not discussed here. This 
   service is provided by the OISP associated with the coin station. 

   Emergency Calls. Sometimes a caller dials "0" instead of the 
   standard emergency dialstring, resulting in placement of an 
   emergency call to the OISP. The OISP must properly route such a call 
   toward the PSAP. This service is provided by the caller's OISP. 

   Calling Card Billing Service. This enables a calling party to bill a 
   call to a calling card number.  

   Commercial Credit Card Billing Service. This enables a calling party 
   to bill a call to a commercial credit card. 

   Directory Assistance (DA). In some contexts, DA is considered as an 
   Operator Service. Within the context of this document, we consider 
   DA as an Information Service, which is related to but distinct from 
   Operator Services. 

   The following sections describe an initial set of basic high level 
   capabilities required for supporting Operator Services. The 
   capabilities for Information Services generally apply for Operator 
   Services as well. This work is currently under study, and a complete 
   set of required capabilities is expected to be identified in the 
   near future. Similarly to the required capabilities for Information 
   Services, the use of existing SIP mechanisms will be investigated 
   for providing these capabilities. 

    

6.1. Inter Provider Capabilities 

   Ability to accept requests from other providers. This is the ability 
   to accept incoming OIS requests from other providers, including home 
   providers, intermediate providers, and transit providers.  

   Ability to terminate calls to other providers. This applies to call 
   completion services, as well as other services such as third party 
   billing. 

    

 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 19] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

6.2. Inter OISP Capabilities 

   These are capabilities between OISPs.  

   Inward connection. This is a call from one OISP to another, e.g. so 
   that the originating OISP may request services from the terminating 
   OISP. One example of this is Busy Line Verification, where the 
   caller calls their own OISP, and this OISP places an "inward" call 
   to the target party's OISP, which would have the capability to 
   perform the verification of the target party. 

   Transfer between OISPs. In this case, one OISP transfers the call to 
   another OISP, to be handled by that OISP, so that the first OISP is 
   no longer in the signaling path. 

   Moving connection from one OISP to another. An example of this case 
   is where one OISP farms out a specific service to another OISP. The 
   first OISP performs initial handling of the call, to determine the 
   desired service. The call is sent to a different OISP with which the 
   first has a relationship. The first OISP remains in the signaling 
   path, and when the provided service is complete, the first OISP 
   determines what if any additional processing may be necessary. This 
   is similar to a third party call control type arrangement. 

    

6.3. Intra OISP Capabilities 

   Note that some of the following capabilities may be required for 
   inter OISP scenarios as well; this is the subject of ongoing 
   analysis and is not covered in the current iteration of this 
   document. 

   Placing a caller on hold, possibly with announcements. This is used 
   in many services, including Information Services.  

   Exchanging information between Application Server and Operator 
   Workstations/Automated Platforms. This capability is required 
   whenever an operator workstation or automated platform is used. 
   Because an Operator Workstation interacts with a human user, it is 
   expected that additional information, beyond that which an automated 
   system would exchange with an application server, will be required. 
   Further, several modes of application server control are currently 
   under investigation. The first is where the workstation or automated 
   platform is more or less autonomous, and is capable of initiating 
   calls and directly impacting call processing. The other is more of a 
   master-slave relationship, where the AS is in complete control. The 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 20] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   master-slave model requires that more information be exchanged with 
   the AS than does the autonomous model. Other models may be possible. 

   Queuing and call distribution. Resources including human operators 
   and automated platforms need to be tracked and managed, and the 
   appropriate resource of the appropriate type needs to be selected on 
   a per invocation basis. What is needed is that for a particular 
   call, that a set of criteria be provided and the best match resource 
   be selected. This is the job of the ACD server. Some means is needed 
   to communicate the selection criteria for human operators and 
   automated platforms to the ACD server. 

   Operator Registration and Location. Human operators may not be 
   interchangeable, and have specific attributes such as skillsets 
   which can be used to identify the best human operator to service a 
   particular call. Operators log in at workstations at the beginning 
   of a shift, and log out during breaks and at the end of a shift. It 
   is important to associate each available operator with the 
   workstation at which they are logged in, so that requests can be 
   sent to the appropriate human operator. This is needed because the 
   selection process described above identifies a particular human 
   operator; it is then necessary to identify the workstation at which 
   that operator can be reached. 

   Bridging and removal of operator or automated system. Many operator 
   services require that either a human operator or automated system be 
   "bridged" onto a call, and to be removed at some point. 

    

6.4. Capabilities Required for Specific Services 

   Connection Hold and Ringback. This capability involves having the 
   OISP "hold" the connection, such that the originating caller remains 
   connected, even if they attempt to hang up. This is mainly used in 
   relation to emergency services. Ringback is the ability for the OISP 
   to call back the calling party after they have hung up. This too is 
   often used in conjunction with emergency calls. Note that these are 
   only discussed in this document in the context of controlling a PSTN 
   based endpoint, as this capability does not carry over directly to 
   SIP based endpoints. 

   Coin Station Control. This is the ability of the OISP to determine 
   the coinage deposited into a TDM based network controlled coin 
   station (as opposed to an "intelligent" coin station which performs 
   such functions locally). This involves interpretation of the coin 
   control signals sent via specialized trunks from the end office to 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 21] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   which the TDM based coin station is connected via a specialized 
   phone line. Additionally, the need to signal toward the coin station 
   needs to be supported as well, for example to instruct the station 
   to return coins to the caller. This capability is intended to 
   interact with the specialized coin trunk. 

   Network Service Recall. After a call resulting from Operator 
   Services is completed, the caller may signal the desire to return 
   back to the OISP, without placing another call. In the traditional 
   PSTN, this is typically accomplished by the user signaling a hook 
   flash or other distinctive stimulus. 

   Verification and Interrupt. This is used in the Busy Line 
   Verification and Interrupt service, and allows the OISP to determine 
   if the target number is in use, to listen to a scrambled 
   representation of the conversation, and to interrupt the target 
   party's conversation to ask if they would accept a call from the 
   caller.  

   Transfer of emergency services call to selective router. Sometimes a 
   caller places an emergency call using a dial string which invokes 
   operator assistance (such as "0" in North America), rather than an 
   emergency call dial string. In such cases, the OISP must be able to 
   pass the emergency call to the appropriate PSAP. Handling of these 
   types of calls is outside the scope of this document. Standards for 
   emergency calling with SIP are still in development. 

     

7. OISP Internal Architecture 

   This section describes an initial view of the elements internal to 
   the OISP architecture.  

   The following types of elements may be present within the OISP 
   infrastructure: 

   Automatic Call Distributor (ACD) server - The ACD provides queuing 
   and call distribution functions for human operators. Specifically, 
   it is the component that tracks the availability of the human 
   operators and selects an available operator utilizing complex 
   algorithms based on operator skills, type of call, type of request, 
   calling party information, etc. Similar functionality is required 
   with respect to automated platforms. The ACD server is modeled as an 
   Application Server. Two different models of ACD include a ''query'' 
   model, where the ACD accepts a request and returns a response (such 
   as a SIP redirection response) identifying the selected resource, 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 22] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   and an ''inline'' model, where the ACD server accepts a request and 
   inserts itself into the signaling path, making its selection and 
   sending requests to that resource. There is currently work in the 
   MEDIACTL working group regarding Media Resource Brokers (MRBs) which 
   may be relevant to this. 

   The ACD server may also contain functionality for tracking and 
   maintaining statistics about resource utilization; this is sometimes 
   referred to as force management. 

   Customer Profile Database - The Customer Profile Database is a per 
   subscriber database maintained by an OISP about its customers. Some 
   of this information might be statically provisioned, other 
   information such as customer preferences or session information 
   might be populated dynamically as a result of customer interactions. 

   Messaging Gateways - Messaging Gateways provide access and data via 
   E-mail, SMS, MMS, WAP. 

   Operator and Information Services Application Server (OIS-AS) - The 
   OIS-AS contains AS functions specifically for directory assistance 
   and information services as well as other Operator Services. This 
   may coordinate multiple call legs, connecting the caller in sequence 
   to one or more OIS-MS and/or operator workstations according to the 
   logic contained within. The OIS-AS may need to communicate with 
   elements of other providers, for instance to query information about 
   the capabilities and characteristics of the caller's equipment, or 
   to access another provider's operator resources.  

   Operator and Information Services Media Server (OIS-MS) - The OIS-MS 
   provides the media resources for playing announcements, performing 
   voice recognition, performing listing database queries, generating 
   whisper from the user's verbal request, etc.  

   Operator Workstations - Operator Workstations provide an interface 
   to the human operator. They may receive the customer's recorded 
   request (e.g. name and city of requested listing), information from 
   listing or other databases, and also terminate a multimedia session 
   with the customer. Operator workstations are specialized SIP 
   endpoints, and may be modeled in various ways, such as UAs or media 
   servers.  

   PSTN Gateways - OISPs need to interface with the PSTN. Thus, 
   gateways are needed to interface between the OISP and both signaling 
   and bearer. The bearer is handled by trunk gateways, which interface 
   RTP streams on the OISP side to TDM trunks on the PSTN side. The 
   signaling may be handled by signaling gateways which interface SS7 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 23] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   on the PSTN side and SIP on the OISP side. Currently in North 
   America, inband signaling on MF trunks is common for interfacing to 
   OISPs, and trunk gateways need to be able to interpret and report as 
   well as generate the appropriate MF signaling.  

   Service Databases - Service Databases store service specific 
   information (e.g. listing information such as name, address, and 
   phone number, etc.) These may be located in the OISP's network 
   and/or in other networks, and more than one may be used. 

   SIP Proxy - One or more SIP proxies may be present in the OISP 
   network, to facilitate SIP communications with other providers as 
   well as to perform call processing functions between OISP 
   components. 

   The following figure shows a simplified view of an OISP internal 
   architecture. The lines show logical connectivity; elements 
   communicate via the proxy. A single OIS-AS is shown, along with up 
   to "k" OIS-MS and up to "m" Operator Work Stations, and an ACD 
   server. Communications between elements are assumed to traverse a 
   proxy, which has been omitted from the figure for brevity. 

    
                +--------+   +---------+   +---------+ 
                | OIS-AS |-+-| OIS-MS1 |...| OIS-MSk | 
                +--+-----+ | +---------+   +---------+ 
                   | 
                   |       | +---------+   +---------+ 
                   |       +-| OWS1    |...| OWSk    | 
                +--+--+    | +---------+   +---------+ 
                | ACD |    | 
                +-----+    | +--+---+ 
                           +-|PSTNGW|  
                             +------+ 
    
          Figure 5 Simplified view of OISP Internal Architecture 

    

8. General Approach 

   This section describes one possible way to implement DA using SIP. 
   Other ways may be possible. 

   The general approach involves having the OIS-AS host most of the 
   processing logic, and to control the call in general. The OIS-AS 
   implements a third party call control (3PCC) functionality, as 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 24] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   described in [RFC3725]. It terminates the signaling dialog from the 
   caller, and originates dialogs towards other components as 
   necessary. There may be multiple sequential sessions set up during 
   the course of a DA call.  

   For example, the OIS-AS would initiate a new dialog towards a MS for 
   front-end automation. When it gets the 200 OK from the MS with SDP, 
   it passes that SDP back toward the caller. When the front end 
   automation has completed, the OIS-MS sends a BYE containing message 
   bodies conveying the success of the operation (i.e., was it able to 
   obtain the listing) as well as any data related to the operation. In 
   case of success, the body might carry the listing information, or a 
   URI pointing to it. In case of failure, it might carry a URI 
   pointing to the whisper file. 

   In case of failure, the OIS-AS would determine that the call needs 
   to be routed to a human operator. The OIS-AS first needs to identify 
   a suitable operator to handle this request. The ACD server has this 
   responsibility, and could be implemented as a redirect server facing 
   the OIS-AS, redirecting towards the best suited available operator. 
   Facing the operator workstations, the ACD server could be 
   implemented as a presence server, maintaining availability of each 
   operator, as well as the associated information for each (e.g. 
   languages, skill level, cost, etc). 

   The OIS-AS would then send an INVITE toward the identified operator 
   workstation. This INVITE includes the caller's SDP as well as a URI 
   pointing to the whisper file. The workstation could play the whisper 
   to the operator as the call is answered. The operator workstation's 
   SDP would be passed back to the caller via a re-INVITE or UPDATE 
   request.  

   If the operator is successful in locating the desired listing, the 
   workstation would send a BYE containing message bodies with an 
   indication of success, and either the listing information of a 
   pointer to the same. 

   The OIS-AS would then initiate a call leg towards an OIS-MS for back 
   end automation. The INVITE would include the same body with the 
   listing information that was sent by the operator workstation. The 
   OIS-MS returns its SDP, which the OIS-AS would propagate back over 
   the originating leg via a re-INVITE or UPDATE request. The back end 
   automation process includes audibly playing out the listing 
   information, and possibly offering call completion service. The OIS-
   MS sends a BYE with a message body indicating whether call 
   completion is desired. 

 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 25] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   If call completion is desired, the OIS-AS sends a REFER back over 
   the originating call leg to the caller, and clears the call. 

   These examples describe simple voice scenarios. Other media types 
   may be possible. For example, it may be desirable to send the 
   listing information via text message to the caller's terminal, or to 
   show a video clip. Such features require knowledge of the calling 
   terminal's capabilities and characteristics. The mechanism described 
   in [RFC3840] Indicating User Agent Capabilities in the Session 
   Initiation Protocol (SIP) can be used for this. The capabilities 
   might have been signaled in the initial INVITE request. Otherwise, 
   the OIS-AS can query for capabilities using an OPTIONS request. 
   Additionally, some non SIP mechanism might be used, such as querying 
   a database (e.g. IMS HSS) in the caller's network. 

   References to a whisper file can be passed using the mechanism 
   described in [RFC4483]. 

   Other information signaled via message bodies includes the success 
   or failure status of operations (such as identifying the requested 
   listing), or other data (such as the listing information).  

   Context information may be maintained on a per call basis. It could 
   include such information as the caller's preferred language, etc. A 
   URI pointing to the context information could be passed between 
   elements in the OISP infrastructure. 

   Note that the IETF MEDIACTRL working group is currently developing 
   mechanisms for control of SIP based MSs by ASs; this work may be 
   applicable for OIS as well. 

    

9. Signaling Mechanisms 

   This section discusses the signaling mechanisms required to provide 
   OIS services. 

9.1. PSTN Protocol Interworking 

   Operator Services will need to interoperate with the existing PSTN. 
   This includes both receiving incoming call requests from the PSTN as 
   well as initiating calls towards the PSTN. There are several issues 
   which are specific to PSTN interworking. 

   Current Operator Services systems use both SS7 ISUP and MF 
   signaling. PSTN gateways interwork between the PSTN signaling and 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 26] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   SIP signaling, and between the PSTN's circuit switched bearer 
   channels and RTP. [RFC3398] defines ISUP-SIP interworking 
   procedures. ATIS, which is responsible for defining North American 
   specific telecommunications standards, provides North American 
   procedures in [T1679]. There is currently no standard for MF-SIP 
   interworking; rather,  ATIS standards assume a gateway model whereby 
   MF signaling is logically mapped to ISUP, then ISUP-SIP interworking 
   procedures are applied. 

   ISUP interworking involves two mechanisms; parameter mapping and 
   encapsulation. Some concepts exist natively in both PSTN and SIP 
   signaling, and thus both PSTN signaling and SIP define protocol 
   mechanisms for conveying such information. Mapping between these is 
   specified in interworking standards such as [RFC3398] and [T1679].  

   Other ISUP parameters have no direct equivalent in SIP, but are 
   needed in SIP headers so that proxies and other SIP entities can 
   route calls; extensions have defined SIP headers and parameters for 
   this purpose. In order to convey those parameters which have no 
   mapping to SIP headers, encapsulation of ISUP messages is used, 
   whereby the ISUP message content is encoded in a MIME body which is 
   carried in SIP messages. [T1679] specifies that the entire ISUP 
   message be encapsulated in a MIME body of type ''application/ISUP'', 
   as registered with IANA and defined in [RFC3204]. [NSS] defines a 
   MIME type ''application/NSS''; this standard specifies that the only 
   parameters which do not have mappings to SIP be included in the NSS 
   body, along with identification of the ISUP version and ISUP message 
   type, rather than encapsulating the entire ISUP message. [T1679] is 
   the ATIS standard for North American networks. 

   Thus, PSTN gateways send SIP messages containing SIP headers and 
   parameters mapped from ISUP parameters where specified, and carrying 
   an ''application/ISUP'' MIME body containing an entire encapsulated 
   ISUP messages. 

   It should be noted that when MF PSTN signaling is used, the use of 
   encapsulated ISUP involves logically mapping the MF signaling to the 
   corresponding ISUP information elements, generation of the 
   corresponding ISUP message, and MIME encapsulation of this generated 
   ISUP message in the corresponding SIP message. 

    

9.2. Conveying Application Specific Information 

   Some information carried by PSTN signaling, such as the ISUP Called 
   Party Number is required for routing calls. Other information, such 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 27] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   as Charge Number, is for use by applications such as operator 
   services, and is not needed for routing the call. 

   With SIP, information needed for routing requests, or which 
   otherwise needs to be available to proxies, should be present in 
   message headers. Note that proxies may add headers and modify header 
   content. 

   Message bodies can be carried in SIP requests and responses. Such 
   bodies are generated by and consumed by endpoints, and are expected 
   to be passed transparently by proxies. Additional headers such as 
   Content-type and Content-disposition describe the MIME type of the 
   message body as well as how the receiving endpoint is to handle 
   unsupported MIME types. Messages can contain more than one body, as 
   described in [RFC2045]. 

   Moreover, much of the information delivered to an operator services 
   system is expected to be provided by trusted equipment in the 
   caller's home provider, rather than by the caller's user equipment.  

   Architectures such as IMS include application servers which have the 
   ability to act as Back to Back User Agents (B2BUAs). Whereas proxies 
   cannot insert message bodies, B2BUAs can in fact do so, because they 
   act as SIP endpoints. 

   Not all information passed in PSTN signaling can be conveyed 
   natively in SIP, but operator services systems expect this 
   information. One option for doing this is to have an application 
   server in the caller's home provider, acting as a B2BUA, populate a 
   MIME body in the INVITE sent to the operator services provider, for 
   consumption by an OIS AS. There is at the time of this writing no 
   agreement on a MIME type to use for this purpose. 

   Some ISUP information for which SIP mappings are not currently 
   defined is also expected to be relevant for calls initiated using 
   SIP. Charge Number is business related information, and is expected 
   to apply regardless of whether a caller is using a SIP or PSTN 
   device. The same is true for Originating Line Information. Again, 
   the use of a MIME body is potential option. Mechanisms for some of 
   this information in SIP header fields and parameters are described 
   in several Internet-Drafts at the time of this writing, and are 
   described in this document where applicable. 

9.3. Calling Party's Identity 

   In many cases, downstream providers may need to know the calling 
   party's identity. This might be needed to influence call processing, 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 28] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   or for usage collection purposes. Also, the calling party's identity 
   in the form of a SIP URI might be needed so that the identity of the 
   home provider can be determined. 

   The calling party's equipment populates the From header in SIP 
   messages. This is not trusted. There are several methods for 
   providing "network-asserted identities", which under the appropriate 
   conditions can be trusted. 

   The SIP Identity mechanism defined in [RFC4474] provides a 
   standardized, architecture agnostic SIP mechanism for 
   cryptographically assuring the user's identity.  

   The P-Asserted-Identity header [RFC3325] is a private extension to 
   SIP that enables a network of trusted SIP servers to assert the 
   identity of authenticated users.  

   Note that some networks may allow their users to hide their 
   identity. In the current North American PSTN, for such cases the 
   caller id information is often transported through the network, 
   marked with a privacy indication such that it will not be presented 
   to the called party. In SIP, the Privacy header field defined in 
   [RFC3323] is used.  

   Bilateral agreements between VOIP providers determine whether 
   providers are within the same "trust domain" as defined in 
   [RFC3324], and what information, including network-asserted 
   identities, may be exchanged between providers. Depending on such 
   agreements, it is possible that the caller identity information is 
   obscured or completely absent. As indicated in [RFC3325], "Masking 
   identity information at the originating user agent will prevent 
   certain services, e.g., call trace, from working in the Public 
   Switched Telephone Network (PSTN) or being performed at 
   intermediaries not privy to the authenticated identity of the user."  

   When an OIS provider is not privy based on bilateral agreement to 
   network asserted identity information from the calling network when 
   the caller has requested privacy, it may be unable to implement any 
   call processing logic based on such information.  

   If the OISP desires to reject anonymous calls, [RFC5079] defines a 
   new SIP response code 433 (Anonymity Disallowed) for this purpose. 

   The following shows an example of an INVITE message contain a P-
   Asserted-Identity header.  


 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 29] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   INVITE sip:da@provider-c.example SIP/2.0 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP proxy-b.provider-b.example.com:5060 
   ;branch=y9hG4bK74bf9 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP proxy-a.provider-a.example.com:5060 
   ;branch=x9hG4bK74bf9 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP client.provider-a.example.com:5060 
   ;branch=z9hG4bK74bf9 
   From: <sip:7327581234@provider-a.example.com>;tag=1234567 
   To: 411 <tel:+411> 
   Contact: <sip:7327581234@provider-a.example.com> 
   P-Asserted-Identity: "732758123" <sip:73237581234@provider-
   a.example.com> 
   Content-Type: application/sdp 
   Content-Length: ... 
   [SDP not shown] 
    

    

9.4. Provider Identification 

   As discussed, in some deployment scenarios, the OISP makes use of 
   the identities of other providers involved in the call. This section 
   discusses how those identities can be conveyed using SIP. 

 

9.4.1. Home Provider 

   In many cases, the OISP needs to identify the caller's Home 
   Provider. This may be needed for branding purposes as well as to 
   potentially influence treatment in other ways. 

   The basic mechanism for determining the home provider is to derive 
   it from the right hand side (RHS) of the network asserted identity.  

   In SIP, identities are expressed as URIs. These can be SIP (or SIPS) 
   URIs, or "tel" URIs.  

   [RFC3261] defines the SIP URI, which is used for identifying SIP 
   resources. The RHS can be expressed as a DNS domain name or as an 
   IPv4 or IPv6 address. The hostname format is most suitable for 
   providing an identity to reach the calling party. For instance the 
   mechanisms defined in [RFC3263] for locating SIP servers depends on 
   the use of domain names for the various types of DNS lookups such as 
   NAPTR, SRV, and A. 

 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 30] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   If a provider decides to provide network asserted identities 
   expressed as SIP URIs using IP addresses instead of hostnames, it 
   forfeits the use of such standardized mechanisms for reaching its 
   users. It also becomes difficult to derive the home provider 
   identity from the network asserted identity. 

   [RFC3966] defines the "tel" URI, which is used for describing 
   resources identified by phone numbers. The "tel" URI format does not 
   include a domain. Thus, if the network asserted identity includes 
   only a "tel" URI, no direct information about the home provider is 
   provided.  

   The SIP Identity mechanism is intended for use with SIP URIs. The 
   PAI mechanism can use either a SIP URI, a "tel" URI, or both. 

   This document depends on the home provider providing a network 
   asserted identity containing a hostname. This includes the SIP 
   identity where the SIP URI contains a hostname, or a PAI header 
   containing at least a SIP URI with a hostname.  

   Very simply, the RHS of the hostname in the SIP URI is extracted and 
   used as the basis to influence call processing. In cases where the 
   caller's identity is not available, as discussed in the "Calling 
   Party's Identity" section, then the home provider's identity is 
   consequently also not available, and call processing logic based on 
   such information (such as branding) cannot take place. 

 

9.4.2. Intermediate Provider 

   In some cases, the OISP may need to know the identity of an 
   intermediate provider which the call has traversed. Recall that for 
   our purposes, we define "intermediate provider" as having a business 
   relationship with both the home provider (to handle OIS requests) 
   and with an OISP (which will actually provide the requested 
   service.) This may be needed to influence treatment. 

   The use of the SIP History-Info mechanism defined in [RFC4244], can 
   be used for this. As the call moves from one provider to the next 
   and is retargeted, corresponding entries are added to the SIP 
   History-Info header. If the domain name format is used for the 
   retargeted entities, then the History-Info header now includes a 
   list of traversed SIP domains or providers, which can be consulted 
   by the OISP. 


 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 31] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   According to [RFC4244], entries should be added to the History-Info 
   header whenever the Request-URI is modified. Cases may exist where 
   the call is sent to another provider but the URI is not modified. In 
   such cases, the provider is not captured by the History-Info header. 

   The following figure illustrates the use of the History-Info header 
   for this purpose. 

 

    Caller        Provider-A     Provider-B     Provider-C 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |(1) INVITE tel:+411          |              | 
      |------------->|              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |(2) INVITE sip:da@prov-b.example.com 
      |              |------------->|              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |(3) INVITE sip:da@prov-
   c.example.com 
      |              |              |------------->| 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
    
    Figure 6 Use of History-Info header to identity traversed providers 

    
 

   1. The user dials ''411", and the resulting INVITE to its home proxy 
   is for "tel: +411". No History-Info header is included yet. 

      INVITE tel:+411 SIP/2.0 
      (other message content omitted) 
    

   2. The home proxy retargets this to ''sip:da@prov-b.example.com'', and 
   adds a History-Info header which includes the targeted-from URI: 

      INVITE sip:DA@prov-b.example.com SIP/2.0 
      History-Info: <tel: +411>; index=1 
      (other message content omitted) 
    
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 32] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   3. Proxy-B retargets this to "SIP: da@prov-c.example.com", and 
   appends another entry to the History-Info header: 

      INVITE sip:DA@prov-c.example.com SIP/2.0 
      History-Info: <tel: +411>; index=1, <sip:da@prov-b.example.com>; 
      index=2 
      (other message content omitted) 
 

   When this request arrives a Proxy-C in Provider C (OISP), it conveys 
   the following: 

     o  The Request-URI (SIP: da@prov-c.example.com) indicates this as 
        a DA call 

     o  The History-Info header conveys the history of the request: 

     o  It started as a tel URI for digits ''411'' 

     o  It was then targeted to provider B 

     o  It is now targeted to provider C 

   Please note that if a transit provider were encountered, the transit 
   provider would simply route the request toward Provider C, and would 
   not perform retargeting. It would not modify the Request-URI nor the 
   SIP History-Info header contents.  

 

9.5. Originating Line Information/ANI II Value 

   In the current PSTN in North America, OIS providers have the ability 
   to tailor treatment based on the type of originating station. For 
   instance, calls from prison phones are restricted from accessing DA 
   services. Example values include POTS, coin, hospital, 
   prison/inmate, cellular, etc. In the PSTN in North America, this 
   information is signaled for SS7 calls using the Originating Line 
   Information (OLI) information element, and in MF calls using the ANI 
   II digits. To support interworking with the PSTN, it must be 
   possible to convey the Originating Line Information value. The 
   ability to convey this information natively with SIP is currently 
   lacking. 

   It is also desirable to characterize certain types of originating 
   SIP based callers using these same values, e.g. prison, police, etc.  

 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 33] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   There is currently no standardized mechanism for conveying OLI 
   information in SIP. Current potential options include the ''oli'' tel 
   URI parameter, the ''isup-oli'' parameter, and use of a MIME body. 

   [draft-patel-dispatch-cpc-oli-parameter]defines the ''oli'' parameter 
   for conveying Originating Line Information in SIP using a tel URI 
   parameter, and is aimed at telecommunications service provider 
   applications, making it the preferred approach. This document 
   defines the parameter to convey the 2-digit numeric OLI value. This 
   is in contrast to the ''cpc'' parameter defined in [draft-mahy-iptel-
   cpc], the document upon which [draft-patel-dispatch-cpc-oli-
   parameter] was based, which specified a limited subset of string 
   based values. This mechanism would be applicable for both PSTN 
   interworking and also for SIP originated calls. 

   The ''isup-oli'' parameter is sometimes used to  convey OLI 
   information for PSTN interworking, but it is not defined in any 
   standards document.  

   For PSTN interworking, the current version of [T1679] does not 
   specify a SIP mapping for the OLI parameter. Thus, this document 
   specifies that it be carried in an encapsulated ISUP message in a 
   MIME body.  This mechanism would be applicable to PSTN interworking 
   but not for SIP originated calls. 

    

 

9.6. Trunk Group Identifier 

   The incoming trunk group number provides information which could be 
   used to influence call processing, thus this information is needed. 
   Trunks are point to point circuits and as such, their remote 
   termination point is unambiguously known. As such, knowledge of the 
   incoming trunk group conveys the identity of the provider offering 
   the call.  

   For PSTN interworking, the incoming trunk group identifier is a key 
   piece of information and must be known. Thus, at a PSTN to IP 
   interworking point, the trunk group information must be kept and 
   signaled forward. This holds for OISP's accepting incoming calls 
   from the PSTN as well as upstream providers accepting calls from the 
   PSTN. 



 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 34] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   [RFC4904], "Representing trunk groups in tel/sip Uniform Resource 
   Identifiers (URIs)" defines a way to signal incoming and/or outgoing 
   trunk group information as a parameter in SIP URIs and tel URIs.  

   To represent incoming trunk groups, the trunk group parameter is 
   included in the Contact header of the SIP message. The "trunk-
   context" parameter should also be included, to ensure that the trunk 
   group is unambiguously identified, since trunk group numbers are not 
   globally unique. 

   At the time of this writing, [T1679], which specifies PSTN 
   interworking for North American networks, does not include this 
   mechanism, possibly because it predates [RFC4904]. However, gateways 
   should include this information for operator services. 

   The following example shows an INVITE containing a trunk group 
   identification in the Contact header: 

     INVITE sip:da@provider-c.example.com SIP/2.0 
     Via: SIP/2.0/UDP proxy-b.provider-b.example.com:5060 
     ;branch=y9hG4bK74bf9 
     Via: SIP/2.0/UDP proxy-a.provider-a.example.com:5060 
     ;branch=x9hG4bK74bf9 
     Via: SIP/2.0/UDP client.provider-a.example.com:5060 
     ;branch=z9hG4bK74bf9 
     From: <sip:7327581234@provider-a.example.com>;tag=1234567 
     To: 411 <tel:+411> 
     Contact: < sip:7327581234@provider-b.example.com;tgrp=101; trunk-
     context=provider-b.example.com@proxy-b.provider-
     b.example.com;user=phone> 
     P-Asserted-Identity: "7327581234" <sip:73237581234@provider-
     a.example.com> 
     Content-Type: application/sdp 
     Content-Length: ... 
 

9.7. Identification of PSTN Originated Calls 

   Since calls arriving via PSTN trunks may require different 
   processing from those received from SIP endpoints, it must be able 
   to distinguish between these types of calls. For PSTN originated 
   calls, the Contact header identifies the gateway, and also the 
   presence of the ''tgrp'' parameter in that header indicates that the 
   call was received via a PSTN trunk. Obviously the presence of an 
   encapsulated ISUP message also identifies the call as such. 


 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 35] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   In some cases, the identity of the home PSTN provider of the caller 
   may be known (e.g., the call arrived via a dedicated trunk group 
   from a PSTN end office). In such cases, the gateway may populate the 
   host portion of the SIP URI in a P-Asserted-Identity header field 
   with a value of local significance within the OISP identifying that 
   PSTN home provider. Conveyance of such information beyond the OISP 
   is outside the scope of this document. 

 

9.8. Dialed Digits 

   Currently in the North American PSTN, the OIS provider may take into 
   account the digits dialed by the user. In that scenario the dialed 
   digits are frequently forwarded to the OIS provider.  

   Using SIP, the dialed digits would typically be sent by the user's 
   equipment in the form of a tel URI or SIP URI in the Request-URI of 
   a SIP INVITE. It is possible that retargeting could take place, in 
   which case the dialed digits would be lost.  

   The SIP History-Info mechanism defined in [RFC4244] provides a 
   mechanism for solving exactly this type of problem. It defines a new 
   optional SIP header, History-Info, to provide a standard mechanism 
   for capturing the request history information. Whenever a node which 
   supports this mechanism modifies the Request-URI of a request, it 
   captures this in the History-Info header.  

   The following example shows an INVITE containing a History-Info 
   header, which conveys the original dialed digits, after having been 
   retargeted. 

      INVITE sip:DA@prov-b.example.com SIP/2.0 
      (other message content omitted) 
      History-Info: <tel: +411>; index=1, <sip:da@prov-b.example.com>; 
      index=2 
    

   Please see the section titled "Arbitrary Involved Provider" for an 
   example of a flow where the History-Info mechanism delivers the 
   dialed digits to the OISP when retargeting has occurred. 

 




 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 36] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

9.9. Retargeting to Identify the Desired Service 

   It is necessary to identify the service being requested. Such 
   services might include directory assistance with or without call 
   completion. The logic to determine this might reside in one or more 
   points in the network. Additionally, the identification of the 
   service might be refined as the request traverses potentially 
   multiple networks, depending on the availability of additional 
   information.  

   It is proposed here to retarget the Request-URI of the SIP request 
   to specify the desired service. While the initial Request-URI might 
   specify "SIP:411@provider-a.example.com", a downstream element might 
   invoke service logic and determine that this call should be sent to 
   OISP C's network for directory assistance with call completion, and 
   change the Request-URI to "SIP:da-with-call-completion@oisp-
   c.example.com".  

   A similar approach is taken for identifying resources in [RFC4240]. 

   [CSI], a work in progress, discusses explicit service identifiers 
   for using in IMS [IMS] based networks. 

 

9.10. Charge Number 

   In the current PSTN in North America, a Charge Number is signaled 
   with call originations. The Charge Number identifies the customer or 
   account with which the caller is associated. In many cases it is the 
   same as the Calling Party Number, while in others it is different - 
   e.g. the main number for a business which has many individual 
   calling numbers. This might be needed for usage collection, but it 
   also could influence call processing, especially when a particular 
   type of service applies for any caller associated with a particular 
   charge number.  

   There is currently no IETF standardized mechanism to convey the 
   Charge Number in SIP. The need to convey equivalent information for 
   SIP based callers is also under investigation. 

   [PCI] proposes a ''P-Charge-Info'' SIP header for carrying charge 
   information for a call. It is intended to facilitate carrying 
   information equivalent to OLI for SIP originated calls. It is also 
   intended to support PSTN interworking by carrying the ISUP Charge 
   Number value. 

 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 37] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   For PSTN interworking, [T1679] does not specify a SIP mapping for 
   the Charge Number parameter. Thus, it is carried in an encapsulated 
   ISUP message in a MIME body. The P-Charge-Info header, if 
   standardized, would be useful in this role. 

   For SIP originated calls, there is no currently standardized way to 
   carry this information. The P-Charge-Info header, if standardized, 
   would be useful in this role.  

 

9.11. Access Prefix 

   In the current PSTN in North America, operator services calls are 
   often originated by dialing a prefix such as ''0''. In ISUP signaling, 
   the ''0'' is not carried in the Called Party Number parameter. Rather, 
   it is stripped, and the ISUP Operator Services Information (OSI) 
   parameter carries an indication of the original access prefix. 

   For SIP originations, there are several options. First, the dialed 
   digits, including any prefix, can be included in the Request-URI. 
   Alternatively, an AS in the caller's home provider can retarget the 
   request based on the digits, such that new Request-URI identifies 
   the requested service. The original dialed digits can be carried in 
   the retargeted-from Request-URI in a History-Info header. For 
   example, a Request-URI containing a zero plus 10 digits might be 
   retargeted at an AS to sip:operator-assistance@provider-
   b.example.com. Though not currently standardized, these options can 
   also be used for PSTN interworking. I.e., the GW could choose to 
   prepend a prefix to the digits in the Request-URI based on the 
   received Operator Services Information parameter. Additionally, the 
   GW could support building a Request-URI which specifies the 
   requested service, based on analysis of the incoming ISUP signaling. 

   For PSTN originations, the Request-URI can be formed as described 
   above for SIP originations. Additionally, this information is also 
   conveyed via the Operator Services Information parameter in the 
   encapsulated ISUP. 

    

9.12. Signaling of Carrier Information 

   In North America, the handling of PSTN calls utilizing Interexchange 
   Carrier (IXC) networks are subject to specific regulatory 
   requirements, resulting in specific signaling requirements which may 
   differ from those in other regions. Reflecting this is the 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 38] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   definition of ANSI ISUP parameters not defined in the ITU-T as well 
   as specific usage for certain ISUP parameters. Interworking between 
   ISUP and SIP signaling for such scenarios is documented in several 
   specifications, but there are issues with these specifications. This 
   section identifies the ISUP parameters involved in IXC signaling in 
   North America, and provides an overview of some of the issues with 
   current interworking specifications. Subsequent sections will 
   specifically address each parameter. The relevant ANSI ISUP 
   parameters include the Transit Network Selection (TNS) parameter, 
   the Carrier Identification Parameter (CIP), and the Carrier 
   Selection Information (CSI) parameter.  

   The ISUP Transit Network Selection (TNS) parameter is used to route 
   calls to a specific carrier. In North American networks, it is used 
   on several different interfaces to request that a call be routed to 
   a particular carrier. TNS is also used in ITU-T ISUP. 

   Specialized switches called Access Tandems (ATs) provide IXC 
   networks with access to Local Exchange Carrier (LEC) switches. When 
   a LEC switch originates an IXC call through an AT, it uses the TNS 
   to inform the AT of the IXC to which the call is to be routed. 

   Based on business arrangements, IXCs may also provide access to 
   other IXCs. Thus a LEC switch may need to route a call using IXC B, 
   but might have connectivity to only IXC A. The LEC switch could, 
   depending on arrangements, send the call to IXC A, with the TNS 
   parameter specifying IXC B. This requests IXC A to hand the call to 
   IXC B. 

   Also in North America, carrier selection procedures allow a caller 
   to presubscribe to a particular IXC, and further to casually dial on 
   a per call basis yet a different IXC to be used. Based on business 
   arrangements, the carrier which will actually carry the call may be 
   different from the presubscribed or dialed carrier. In ANSI ISUP, 
   the Carrier Identification Parameter (CIP) is used to convey the 
   dialed or presubscribed carrier, and accordingly the value of the 
   CIP parameter may differ from that of any included TNS parameter. 
   The definition of a separate parameter for this in ANSI ISUP 
   underscores the need to separately identify the dialed or 
   presubscribed carrier from the carrier which actually routes the 
   call. 

   Both [RFC3398] and [T1679] discuss interworking between the ''cic'' 
   tel URI parameter and the ISUP TNS and/or CIP parameters. This 
   document points out that there are issues with both these 
   specifications, but does not attempt to resolve those issues here. 

 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 39] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   [RFC3398] provides guidance on mapping between the ''cic'' tel URI 
   parameter and the corresponding ISUP parameter. It essentially 
   states that ''cic'' maps to TNS except for North American networks, 
   where ANSI ISUP is used, where it maps to CIP, also allowing for 
   application of local policy.  

   Some information not discussed in [RFC3398] includes the fact that 
   for North American networks it is not an either/or choice between 
   inclusion of TNS and CIP, that both ISUP parameters may be present, 
   that their values may differ, the nature of the relationship between 
   these parameters, or what to do in the ISUP to SIP direction when 
   both TNS and CIP are present. Also, for a given ''cic'' parameter 
   received by the gateway, and depending on the outgoing PSTN 
   interface type, a TNS value may also need to be determined and 
   populated in the outgoing IAM, in addition to the CIP parameter. 

   [T1679] specifies a mapping between the ISUP TNS parameter and the 
   ''cic'' parameter in the Request-URI for North American networks. In 
   doing so, it precludes the use of the ''cic'' parameter to convey the 
   identity of the dialed or presubscribed carrier for PSTN 
   interworking scenarios, as is suggested in [RFC4694], [DAI], and 
   [RFC3398] for North American networks. Also, when the ''cic'' 
   parameter is used to convey TNS for PSTN interworking scenarios, 
   then if the ''cic'' parameter were also to be used to convey the 
   dialed or presubscribed carrier for SIP originated calls, there is a 
   potential for ambiguity regarding the meaning of a received ''cic'' 
   parameter. 

   The Carrier Selection Information (CSI) ISUP parameter indicates how 
   the IXC identified in the CIP parameter was selected. For example, 
   it may be the caller's presubscribed carrier, or may have been 
   casually dialed, etc. The ''dai'' tel URI parameter described in [DAI] 
   is intended to convey this information in SIP. 

   The signaling of carrier selection information for non interworked, 
   all-SIP calls in North American networks is for further study. 

    

9.13. Transit Network Selection 

   As indicated above, the TNS identifies the IXC to which a call is to 
   be routed. Note that it does not identify the network in which the 
   call will actually terminate. The TNS is used in cases where it is 
   necessary to specify the specific IXC through which the call should 
   be routed. One example is when a call is handed off via an AT which 
   provides access to multiple IXCs, in this case it is necessary to 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 40] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   identify the desired IXC to the AT. Another example is when business 
   arrangements dictate that the call be handed off to one IXC, which 
   hands the call off to yet another specified IXC. For example, a call 
   may be handed to IXC A with the TNS identifying IXC B; in this case 
   the TNS instructs IXC A to hand off the call to Carrier B. 

   The domain of a SIP URI in the Request-URI of a SIP INVITE can be 
   seen to fill a role analogous to that of the TNS. If one provider 
   needs to route a call to a specific provider, it would populate the 
   domain in the Request-URI with the domain of that specific provider. 
   When the call reaches that specific provider, it is typically 
   (though not always) sent to a different provider to terminate the 
   call. The analog to the example in the previous paragraph would be 
   for a SIP provider to hand an INVITE to SIP Provider A with the 
   domain in the Request-URI identifying SIP Provider B. As in the 
   previous example, the signaling would reflect business arrangements. 

   One potential mechanism for interworking for North America between 
   the ISUP TNS and SIP is to map between TNS and a SIP domain 
   representing the provider identified in the TNS. Mappings between 
   TNS values and corresponding SIP domains would need to be pre-
   established and maintained at gateways implementing this mechanism. 
   When such a gateway receives an ISUP IAM containing a TNS parameter, 
   it would populate the domain of the Request-URI of the corresponding 
   SIP INVITE with the appropriate domain mapped from the received TNS 
   value. Conversely, when a gateway implementing this mechanism 
   receives a SIP INVITE, the domain of the SIP URI would be consulted 
   by the gateway and potentially mapped to any included TNS value. 
   Note that the inclusion of a TNS value is dependent upon local 
   policy, which may be determined from several factors including the 
   provisioned characteristics of the trunk group via which the call is 
   routed. 

   Note that this mechanism precludes the use of tel URIs in the 
   Request-URI for calls involving IXCs; such URIs, including their 
   parameters, would need to be converted to SIP URIs as described in 
   [RFC3966]. 

   For SIP originated calls, the domain of the Request-URI is already 
   used to identify the provider to which the request should be routed, 
   thus there is no need to for additional SIP signaling to express 
   such information. 

    



 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 41] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

9.14. Carrier Identification 

   In the current PSTN in North America, callers can specify the IXC 
   they want to use for a particular long distance call. Otherwise, 
   their presubscribed IXC is used. In either case the carrier 
   identification code (CIC) of the chosen carrier is signaled. In ANSI 
   ISUP this is signaled in the Carrier Information Parameter (CIP). 
   Per [RFC3398], for interworking from ANSI ISUP to SIP, the CIP is 
   mapped to the ''cic'' tel URI parameter, and vice versa. Note that in 
   North America, the CIP, which identifies the selected carrier, may 
   have a different value than the TNS, and is not used for routing 
   purposes. 

   For SIP originated calls, the ''cic'' parameter can also be used to 
   identify the selected carrier, as described in [RFC4694]. Note 
   however that [RFC4694] describes a usage of ''cic'' where it is used 
   for routing, which is more consistent with ITU-T ISUP than with ANSI 
   ISUP, where it is not used for routing. As a result, some of the 
   procedures in that document would require modification to be 
   applicable to North American deployments.  

    

9.15. Carrier Selection Information 

   The ISUP Carrier Selection Information (CSI) parameter describes how 
   the selected IXC was chosen; e.g. presubscribed, dialed, etc. One 
   example of the utility of this information comes from Operator 
   services calls that include call completion, whereby a call is 
   initiated on behalf of the caller. In order to know which IXC to 
   use, and how that IXC was chosen, the operator services provider 
   needs to receive the CIP and Carrier Selection Information. In ANSI 
   ISUP this describes the carrier identified in the CIP; while in ITU-
   T ISUP it describes the carrier identified in the TNS. Thus in both 
   cases it describes the selection of the carrier identified in the 
   ''cic'' tel URI parameter of the Request-URI. 

   When interworking from ISUP to SIP, this information is included in 
   the encapsulated ISUP. The ''dai'' parameter proposed in [DAI] can 
   also be used to be carry this information. The ''dai'' parameter can 
   also be used for SIP originated calls. Thus, the dai information 
   would be associated with the carrier identified in the ANSI CIP or 
   the ITU-T TNS. That is, in the ANSI model, it is associated with the 
   carrier information that is delivered to the interested 
   application(s) rather than the information that is used for routing.  

    
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 42] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

9.16. Passing Whisper 

   During front end automation, the OIS-MS will record and may time 
   compress the caller's perhaps meandering speech into what is known 
   as the "whisper". This is intended to be played into a human 
   operator's ear, should the call be referred to an operator, to avoid 
   the operator from having to prompt the caller again. The whisper is 
   obtained during the front end automation, and saved to an audio 
   file. 

   If the call needs to be transferred to a human operator, the whisper 
   will need to be played to the operator at the same time or slightly 
   prior to connecting the caller to the operator. Thus, the operator 
   workstation needs to be able to access the whisper file. 

   When the OIS-MS performs front end automation, it generates the 
   whisper and saves it as an audio file. The location, storage type, 
   and format are out of the scope of this document. What is needed is 
   a way for the OIS-MS to convey the whisper information to the OIS-
   AS, so it could potentially be used for later processing, such as 
   passing to a human operator. 

   Due to size constraints, it may not be feasible or desirable to pass 
   the actual audio file containing the whisper. This document will 
   discuss the most general case of passing a pointer, in the form of a 
   URI, to the audio content. What follows is a description of one 
   possible way to implement this. The work of the recently formed IETF 
   MEDIACTRL working group may provide alternatives. 

   Since the whisper is an output of the front end automation process, 
   it makes sense to return this upon completion of that process. The 
   most reasonable time to do this is when the OIS-MS sends the BYE. 

   Any SIP request, including BYE, can contain a message body. 
   [RFC4483] defines an extension to the URL MIME External-Body Access-
   Type to satisfy the content indirection requirements for SIP. These 
   extensions are aimed at allowing any MIME part in a SIP message to 
   be referred to indirectly via a URI. 

   This is illustrated in the following figure. Note that the proxy has 
   been omitted for clarity, as have some messages not crucial to 
   illustrating the use of this mechanism. All SIP signaling traverses 
   the proxy. 




 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 43] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

     AS             MS          Operator 
      |              |              |       
      |              |              |       
      |              |              |       
      |(1) INVITE    |              |       
      |------------->|              |       
      |              |              |       
      |(2) 200 OK    |              |       
      |<-------------|              |       
      |(3) ACK       |              |       
      |------------->|              |       
      |              |              |       
      |MS prompts user, collects whisper 
      |              |              |       
      |              |              |       
      |(4) BYE, body w. status, whisper URI 
      |<-------------|              |       
      |              |              |       
      |(5) 200 OK    |              |       
      |------------->|              |       
      |              |              |       
      |(6) INVITE w. whisper URI    | 
      |---------------------------->| 
      |              |              |       
      |(7) 200 OK SDP|              |       
      |<----------------------------| 
      |(8) ACK       |              |       
      |---------------------------->| 
      |              |              |       
      |              |              |       
    
            Figure 7 Call flow illustrating passing of whisper 

    

   1. INVITE AS->MS 
   INVITE sip:da@ms-1.oisp-c.example.com SIP/2.0 
   [remainder of message omitted] 
    

   2. 200 OK MS->AS 
   SIP/2.0 200 OK 
   [remainder of message omitted] 
    



 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 44] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   4. BYE MS->AS 
   BYE sip:as-1@as-1.oisp-c.example.com SIP/2.0 
   [non relevant portions of message omitted] 
   Content-Type: message/external-body; access-type="URL"; 
       URL="http://ms1.oisp-c.example.com/whisper/20070206092700-
   0001.wav" 
       expiration="Tues, 06 Feb 2007 09:30:00 GMT"; 
   <CRLF> 
   Content-Type: audio/x-wav 
   Content-Disposition: render 
   <CRLF> 

    

   5. 200 OK AS->MS 
   SIP/2.0 200 OK 
   [remainder of message omitted] 
    

   6. INVITE AS->Operator Workstation 
   INVITE sip:operator@operator-123.oisp-c.example.com SIP/2.0 
   [non relevant portions of message omitted] 
   Content-Type: message/external-body; access-type="URL"; 
       URL="http://ms1.oisp-c.example.com/whisper/20070206092700-
   0001.wav" 
       expiration="Tues, 06 Feb 2007 09:30:00 GMT"; 
   <CRLF> 
   Content-Type: audio/x-wav 
   Content-Disposition: render 
   <CRLF> 
    

   7. 200 OK Operator->AS 
   SIP/2.0 200 OK 
   [remainder of message omitted] 
    

   Note that this same mechanism also supports the case where front end 
   automation is performed by one provider, and another provider 
   provides the operator assistance. In this type of scenario, 
   provisions need to made such that the second provider can access the 
   resources referenced by the URI.  

    



 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 45] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

9.17. Calling Equipment Capabilities and Characteristics 

   It may be necessary for the OIS provider to learn the capabilities 
   and characteristics of the caller's equipment. This would be useful 
   when the OIS provider wishes to provide content to the caller other 
   than that which was used on the call to the OISP. For example, the 
   OIS provider might wish to send listing information via text 
   message, or play a video clip about a particular venue about which 
   he has requested information.  

   [RFC3840] Indicating User Agent Capabilities in the Session 
   Initiation Protocol (SIP), defines mechanisms by which a UA can 
   convey its capabilities and characteristics to other user agents and 
   to the registrar for its domain. This information is conveyed as 
   parameters of the Contact header field.  

   This information might be included in the incoming INVITE to the 
   OISP, if the caller's UA supports this mechanism and is configured 
   to do so. Otherwise, the OISP could query the caller's UA by sending 
   a SIP OPTIONS request, and the UA, if it supports this mechanism, 
   would include its capability feature tags in the response to the 
   OISP. 

   The following is an example of an INVITE containing capability 
   feature tags, as it arrives at the OISP. In this case, the UA 
   supports audio, video, and text. Other included tags provide 
   additional information. 

    


















 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 46] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   INVITE sip:da@provider-c.example.com SIP/2.0 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP proxy-b.provider-b.example.com:5060 
   ;branch=y9hG4bK74bf9 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP proxy-a.provider-a.example.com:5060 
   ;branch=x9hG4bK74bf9 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP client.provider-a.example.com:5060 
   ;branch=z9hG4bK74bf9 
   From: <sip:7327581234@provider-a.example.com>;tag=1234567 
   To: 411 <tel:+411> 
   Contact: <sip:7327581234@provider-a.example.com>;audio;video;text 
        ;actor="principle";automata;mobility="fixed" 
        ;methods="INVITE,BYE,OPTIONS,ACK,CANCEL" 
   P-Asserted-Identity: "7327581234" <sip:73237581234@provider-
   a.example.com> 
   P-Asserted-Identity: tel:+7327581234 
   Content-Type: application/sdp 
   Content-Length: ... 
   [SDP not shown] 
    

   If the OISP wishes to query the UA, it can send an OPTIONS request 
   to the UA, and the UA, if it supports this mechanism, would include 
   the feature capability tags in the Contact header, as show above, in 
   the 200 OK response. 

    

9.18. Media Server Returning Data to the Application Server 

   The OIS-AS needs to know the outcome of the operations performed by 
   the OIS-MS, e.g. success/failure of front end automation, etc. Some 
   mechanism is needed to convey this information. This could be 
   conveyed using non SIP mechanisms.  

   Any SIP message, including BYE, can carry message bodies. The 
   simplest way for a OIS-MS to return data to an OIS-AS is to 
   encapsulate the data in a MIME body. This requires agreement between 
   both sides on the format and semantics of these bodies. 

   Another approach is to use the content indirection mechanism to 
   point to the data, however this may be rather cumbersome if only a 
   small amount of data is to be returned. 

   Some OIS service may make use of VoiceXML, whereby the OIS-AS 
   invokes VoiceXML scripts on the OIS-MS, and the OIS-MS returns data 
   to the OIS-AS. [RFC5552] describes a SIP interface to VoiceXML media 
   services, which is commonly employed between application servers and 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 47] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   media servers offering VoiceXML processing capabilities. This may be 
   found useful for OIS services. 

   The topic of application server control of media services is 
   currently under study, and is the subject of the IETF MEDIACTRL 
   working group's efforts. 

   This information can also be conveyed using non SIP mechanisms. 
   Describing such mechanisms is out of the scope of this document. 

    

9.19. Control of Cut Through Direction for PSTN Interworking 

   For PSTN interworking scenarios, it may be desirable to explicitly 
   control the ''duplex'' of the PSTN circuit; whether it be a two way 
   connection or one way in the forward direction. The rules about SDP 
   offer/answer indicate that as soon as an entity sends an SDP, it 
   should be prepared to receive media for that session. SDP provides a 
   ''mode'' attribute with values such as ''a=sendonly'', ''a=recvonly'', 
   ''a=sendrecv'' for explicit control of the directionality.  

   This mode attribute can be included in the SDP sent toward the PSTN 
   GW in order to signal what duplex and directionality is desired. If 
   it's desired to have a talk path only in the backward direction, 
   such that audio is sent toward the caller but not in the opposite 
   direction, then SDP with ''a=sendonly'' can be sent to the GW. When 
   it's desired to have both-way cut through, an updated SDP can be 
   sent with ''a=sendrecv''. This should affect not only the duplex of 
   the voice path but also the related PSTN signaling sent by the GW 
   towards the PSTN switch. For example, with ISUP, the GW should send 
   an ACM with the User Network Interaction bit set in the Optional 
   Backward Call Indication. Existing standards on PSTN interworking do 
   not address this aspect of gateway behaviour. 

   Further, some service provider networks may implement media 
   authorization policies that require the use of the P-Early-Media SIP 
   header field as defined in [RFC5009]. In such networks, or when 
   interoperating with such networks, the response sent toward the PSTN 
   GW as described above should also include the P-Early-Media header 
   field with the ''em-param'' value set to ''sendrecv''. 

    




 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 48] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

9.20. With Holding of Final Responses 

   Currently in the PSTN, for operator services, signaling of Answer, 
   whether this be an ISUP ANM or MF Answer Supervision, is often with 
   held, leaving the call in an alerting state while the caller 
   interacts with the operator services system. The motivation for this 
   is that in the PSTN, billing normally starts when answer is 
   signaled. For some calls answer may never be signaled; in others it 
   may be signaled for instance when a call completion call is 
   answered. 

   The equivalent of answer indication in SIP is the 200 OK final 
   response. It is not an intrinsic property of SIP based systems that 
   billing must start upon 200 OK. In cases where it's desired to 
   emulate the PSTN behaviour, the 200 OK can be with held. When this 
   is done, normal SIP procedures need to be followed to prevent the 
   session from timing out. For example, the UAS can periodically 
   retransmit non-100 provisional responses as described in Section 
   13.3.1.1 of [RFC3261]. 

    

10. Example Call Flow - Directory Assistance 

10.1. Basic Flow 

   The following call flow provides examples of how a DA service could 
   be implemented using the mechanisms described in this document. It 
   is intended to illustrate the intended use of the proposed signaling 
   mechanism. Some messages not crucial to this may be omitted for 
   clarity.  

    














 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 49] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

    
    
   Caller    Proxy A   Proxy B   Proxy C   OIS-AS    OIS-MS1 
      |         |         |         |         |         |       
      |         |         |         |         |         |       
      |         |         |         |         |         |       
      |(1) INVITE tel:411 |         |         |         |       
      |-------->|         |         |         |         |       
      |         |         |         |         |         |       
      |         |(2) INVITE sip:da@prov-b.example.com |         |       
      |         |-------->|         |         |         |       
      |         |         |         |         |         |       
      |         |         |(3) INVITE sip:da@prov-c.example.com | 
      |         |         |-------->|         |         |       
      |         |         |         |         |         |       
      |         |         |         |(4) INVITE sip:da-cc@prov-
   c.example.com 
      |         |         |         |-------->|         |       
      |         |         |         |         |         |       
      |         |         |         |         |(5) INVITE prompt & 
   collect 
      |         |         |         |         |-------->| 
      |         |         |         |         |         |       
      |         |         |         |         |(6) 200 OK w.SDP 
      |         |         |         |         |<--------| 
      |         |         |         |         |(7) Ack  |  
      |         |         |         |         |-------->| 
      |         |         |         |         |         |       
      |         |         |         |(8) 200 OK w.SDP   | 
      |         |         |         |<--------|         |       
      |         |         |         |(9) Ack  |         |       
      |         |         |         |-------->|         |       
      |         |         |         |         |         |       
      |         |         |(10) 200 OK w.sdp  |         |       
      |         |         |<--------|         |         |       
      |         |         |(11) Ack |         |         |       
      |         |         |-------->|         |         |       
      |         |         |         |         |         |       
      |         |(12) 200 OK w.sdp  |         |         |       
      |         |<--------|         |         |         |       
      |         |(13) Ack |         |         |         |       
      |         |-------->|         |         |         |       
      |         |         |         |         |         |       
      |(14) 200 OK w.sdp  |         |         |         |       
      |<--------|         |         |         |         |       
      |(15) Ack |         |         |         |         |       
      |-------->|         |         |         |         |       
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 50] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

      |         |         |         |         |         |       
      |         |         |         |         |         |       
      |         |         |         |         |         |       
    

                       Figure 8 DA Call flow, part 1 

    

   For brevity, only relevant SIP headers will be shown. The following 
   test refers to Figure 8. 

   The user, homed in provider A, initiates a request for an OIS 
   service, for instance by dialing "411". The user's UA sends a SIP 
   INVITE. It might contain a "tel" URI. 

   1. INVITE UE -> Home Proxy 
    
   INVITE tel:+411 SIP/2.0 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP client.provider-a.example.com:5060 
   ;branch=z9hG4bK74bf9 
   From: <sip:7327581234@provider-a.example.com>;tag=1234567 
   To: 411 <tel:+411> 
   Contact: <sip:7327581234@provider-a.example.com> 
   Content-Type: application/sdp 
   Content-Length: ... 
    

   The home provider knows nothing of OISP services, for instance it 
   might be a rather small scale provider. It is essentially set up to 
   forward all calls of this type to Provider B. It translates the 
   Request-URI to a SIP URI and sends the call on to provider B. 
   Because of this retargeting, it adds a History-Info header to 
   capture the dialed digits.  

   The caller's identity is verified in a manner consistent with this 
   provider's policies, and the proxy adds two P-Asserted-Identity 
   headers: one with a SIP URI, and another with a "tel" URI. 

    







 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 51] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   2. INVITE proxy-a -> proxy-b 
    
   INVITE sip:411@provider-b.example.com SIP/2.0 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP proxy-a.provider-a.example.com:5060 
   ;branch=x9hG4bK74bf9 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP client.provider-a.example.com:5060 
   ;branch=z9hG4bK74bf9 
   From: <sip:7327581234@provider-a.example.com>;tag=1234567 
   To: 411 <tel:+411> 
   Contact: <sip:7327581234@provider-a.example.com> 
   P-Asserted-Identity: "7327581234" <sip:73237581234@provider-
   a.example.com> 
   P-Asserted-Identity: tel:+7327581234 
   History-Info: <tel: +411>; index=1 
   Content-Type: application/sdp 
   Content-Length: ... 
    
    
   Proxy-b in provider-b's network receives the request. This is a 
   larger network, and it has business relationships with several OIS 
   providers, as well as with several providers which serve 
   subscribers. This provider has logic which requires it to query the 
   Home Provider's network to find some information related to the 
   caller. This is not likely to be a SIP related function, and is thus 
   out of scope for this document. The logic executes, taking the 
   result of this query into account. It is determined that the call is 
   for directory assistance, and that the call should be routed to 
   provider C for handling.  

   So, proxy-b retargets the Request-URI to reflect this, and routes 
   the call to provider C (the OISP). It adds another entry to the 
   History-Info header to capture this retargeting. 

    













 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 52] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   3. INVITE proxy-b -> proxy-c 
    
   INVITE sip:da@provider-c.example.com SIP/2.0 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP proxy-b.provider-b.example.com:5060 
   ;branch=y9hG4bK74bf9 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP proxy-a.provider-a.example.com:5060 
   ;branch=x9hG4bK74bf9 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP client.provider-a.example.com:5060 
   ;branch=z9hG4bK74bf9 
   From: <sip:7327581234@provider-a.example.com>;tag=1234567 
   To: 411 <tel:+411> 
   Contact: <sip:7327581234@provider-a.example.com> 
   P-Asserted-Identity: "732758123" <sip:73237581234@provider-
   a.example.com> 
   P-Asserted-Identity: tel:+7327581234 
   History-Info: <tel: +411>; index=1, <sip:da@provider-a.example.com>; 
   index=2 
   Content-Type: application/sdp 
   Content-Length: ... 
    
    
   Proxy-c in provider C's network receives the request. The source of 
   the request is authenticated via mechanisms not described here. It 
   needs to know how to bill this call, and thus needs to know which 
   provider it came from. It looks at the topmost Via header, and sees 
   that the call came from provider B.  

   It examines the History-Info header, and is able to identify the 
   dialed digits. It can also determine from the SIP URI which domains 
   have been traversed, as long as each has retargeted and appended an 
   entry in the header. 

   The proxy determines that the call needs to go the OIS-AS for 
   handling, so it retargets if necessary and forwards the INVITE. 

   The OIS-AS performs 3PCC. It determines that the call needs a 
   branded announcement based on the identity of the home provider, 
   which it derives from the P-Asserted-Identity header. It initiates a 
   new call leg toward OIS-MS1 for front end automation. Per [RFC4240], 
   the "dialog" portion of the Request-URI indicates the "prompt & 
   collect" service. The URI identifies the VoiceXML script to be 
   executed. The SDP is the caller's SDP. 

    



 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 53] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

    
   5. INVITE OIS-AS -> MS1 
    
   INVITE sip:dialog@ois-as.prov-c.example.com; \ 
          voicexml=http://vxmlserver.example.net/cgi-bin/script.vxml \ 
   SIP/2.0 
   Via: SIP/2.0/UDP ois-as.prov-c.example.com:5060 
   ;branch=z9hG4bK74bf9 
   From: <sip:ois-as@ois-as.prov-c.com>;tag=1234567 
   To: sip:dialog@ois-as.prov-c.example.com; \ 
          voicexml=http://vxmlserver.example.net/cgi-bin/script.vxml 
   Contact: <sip:ois-as@ois-as.prov-c.example.com> 
   Content-Type: application/sdp 
   Content-Length: ... 
    
   The OIS-MS responds with a 200 OK, with its own SDP. The OIS-AS now 
   sends a 200 OK response back toward the caller, with the MS's SDP. 
   Note that the OIS-AS could first have sent non final response back 
   toward the user. 

    


























 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 54] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

    
   Caller    OIS-AS    OIS-MS1     ACD       OWS     
      |         |         |         |         |       
      |(16) RTP session   |         |         |       
      |...................|         |         |       
      |         |         |         |         |       
      |         |(17) INFO w.URI, body        |       
      |         |<--------|         |         |       
      |         |         |         |         |       
      |         |(18) INVITE        |         |       
      |         |------------------>|         |       
      |         |         |         |         |       
      |         |(19) 182 Queued    |         |       
      |         |<------------------|         |       
      |         |         |         |         |       
      |         |(20) 3xx Redirection         |       
      |         |<------------------|         |       
      |         |         |         |         |       
      |         |(21) INVITE        |         |       
      |         |---------------------------->| 
      |         |         |         |         |       
      |         |(22) 200 OK        |         |       
      |         |<----------------------------| 
      |         |(23) ACK |         |         |       
      |         |---------------------------->| 
      |         |         |         |         |       
      |         |(24) BYE |         |         |       
      |         |-------->|         |         |       
      |         |(25) 200 OK        |         |       
      |         |<--------|         |         |       
      |         |         |         |         |       
      |(26) re INVITE     |         |         |       
      |<--------|         |         |         |       
      |         |         |         |         |       
      |(27) 200 OK        |         |         |       
      |-------->|         |         |         |       
      |(28) ACK |         |         |         |       
      |<--------|         |         |         |       
      |         |         |         |         |       
      |(29) RTP session   |         |         |       
      |.......................................| 
      |         |         |         |         |       
      |         |(30) BYE |         |         |       
      |         |<----------------------------| 
      |         |(31) 200 OK        |         |       
      |         |---------------------------->|  
    
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 55] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

                       Figure 9 DA Call flow, part 2 

    

   The following text refers to Figure 9.  

   The user is now connected (16) to the MS, which plays a branded 
   announcement, and prompts for the listing information. When the user 
   speaks his request, the MS processes the audio to obtain a "whisper" 
   file, or condensed version of the request. In this example, the MS 
   is unable to successfully perform the query, so it sends an 
   indication of this to the AS. In this example, the indication is 
   sent using an as yet unspecified protocol message carried in a 
   message body in a SIP INFO message, which also carries a URI which 
   points to the whisper file. Other mechanisms, including non SIP 
   mechanisms, could also be used to this end (this is the subject of 
   further study). The AS allows the caller to remain connected to the 
   MS while it sets up a call to an operator workstation (OWS), 
   allowing for the possibility to play custom announcements to the 
   caller. 

   The OIS-AS decides based on the failure indication that it needs to 
   route the call to a human operator. It sends an INVITE (18) to the 
   ACD server. This INVITE carries information about the required 
   characteristics, such as language and skill set, of the operator 
   which should be selected for this call. The means by which this 
   information is carried has yet to be defined. One possible way an 
   ACD could be implemented is as a presence server, such that it keeps 
   track of the availability of all the operators. The Media Resource 
   Broker being discussed in the IETF MEDIACTRL working group also 
   represents an approach to ACD. 

   If the call needs to be queued due to lack of an immediately 
   available resource, the ACD may send a 812 Queued response (19). In 
   this example, the ACD server is implemented as a redirect server - 
   it sends a 3XX response (20) which identifies the operator the OIS-
   AS should contact. Alternately, the ACD server could have proxied 
   the request to the operator. 

   The OIS-AS now sends an INVITE (21) containing the URI to the 
   whisper, as well as the caller's SDP, to the indicated operator 
   workstation. The operator workstation sends a 200 OK (22) with its 
   SDP, which the OIS-AS sends toward the caller in a re-INVITE (26). 
   Only when the workstation has sent a final response to the INVITE, 
   the AS sends a BYE (24) to the MS. 


 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 56] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   The caller is now connected to the operator (29), and the operator 
   helps the caller with the listing. The operator workstation launches 
   a query, and a response is received. The operator signals a BYE (30) 
   toward the OIS-AS, which may contain the listing information in a 
   message body, a pointer (URI) to the listing information, or it may 
   pass this information to the OIS-AS using some other, non SIP 
   mechanism.  

    
   Caller    OIS-AS    OIS-MS2 
      |         |         |       
      |         |         |       
      |         |         |       
      |         |(32) INVITE 
      |         |-------->| 
      |         |         |       
      |         |(33) 200 OK 
      |         |<--------| 
      |         |(34) ACK | 
      |         |-------->| 
      |         |         |       
      |(35) re INVITE     | 
      |<--------|         |       
      |         |         |       
      |(36) 200 OK        | 
      |-------->|         |       
      |(37) ACK  |        | 
      |<--------|         |       
      |         |         |       
      |(38) RTP session   | 
      |...................| 
      |         |         |       
      |         |(39) BYE w.URI, body 
      |         |<--------| 
      |         |         | 
      |         |(40) 200 OK 
      |         |-------->|    
      |         |         | 
      |(41) REFER         | 
      |<--------|         |       
      |         |         |       
      |         |         |       
             
    
                      Figure 10 DA Call flow, part 3 


 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 57] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

    
    
   The following text refers to Figure 10. 
    
   The OIS-AS sends an INVITE (32) to another OIS-MS, MS2, for back end 
   automation. (Note that though MS2 is shown as a separate element, 
   the functionality it provides may or may not require a separate 
   element.) When it receives MS2's SDP in the 200 OK (33), it sends a 
   re-INVITE (35) toward the user to update the SDP. At this point an 
   audio session is in place between the caller and the back end 
   automation MS (38). The MS plays the listing information, and offers 
   call completion service. The caller accepts, so OIS-MS2 sends a BYE 
   (39) with a message body containing the result of the call 
   completion offer. Since call completion was requested, the OIS-AS 
   sends a REFER (41) to the caller, to cause it to place a call to the 
   listed party. The OIS-AS may or may not care about subsequent 
   NOTIFYs from the caller, and drops out of the call. 
    
    
10.2. OISP Drops Out at Call Completion Setup 

   The OISP may want to support different call flow options with 
   respect to call completion. Reasons for this may include the desire 
   to free up resources quickly, provide additional functionality, etc. 
   When the OISP wants to provide the listing information and free 
   resources as soon as possible, a simple flow based on REFER can be 
   used, as illustrated below. 

   In this flow, the caller is already connected to an OISP resource 
   such as an MS, and requests call completion. In (2), the OISP sends 
   a REFER to initiate the call completion call. The caller's UA 
   indicates acceptance of the REFER by sending a 202 Accepted (3). It 
   then sends a NOTIFY indicating that it is attempting to contact the 
   indicated resource, by sending an INVITE (10). When the AS receives 
   this notification, it understands that the caller is attempting the 
   call completion call, so it drops the call by sending BYE in (6)and  
   (8). The various notifications sent by the caller to the OISP can be 
   used to monitor progress of the call, or may simply be ignored from 
   an application standpoints (from a protocol standpoint they must be 
   acknowledged).  







 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 58] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

    
   Caller           AS             MS        Called Party 
      |              |              |              |       
      |              |              |              |       
      |(1) Caller connected to e.g., MS            |       
      |.............................|              |       
      |              |              |              |       
      |(2) REFER (Called)           |              |       
      |<-------------|              |              |       
      |(3) 202 Accepted             |              |       
      |------------->|              |              |       
      |              |              |              |       
      |(4) NOTIFY (Trying)          |              |       
      |------------->|              |              |       
      |(5) 200 OK    |              |              |       
      |<-------------|              |              |       
      |              |              |              |       
      |              |(6) BYE       |              |       
      |              |------------->|              |       
      |              |(7) 200 OK    |              |       
      |              |<-------------|              |       
      |              |              |              |       
      |(8) BYE       |              |              |       
      |<-------------|              |              |       
      |(9) 200 OK    |              |              |       
      |------------->|              |              |       
      |              |              |              |       
      |(10) INVITE   |              |              |       
      |------------------------------------------->| 
      |              |              |              |       
      |(11) 200 OK   |              |              |       
      |<-------------------------------------------| 
      |(12) Ack      |              |              |       
      |------------------------------------------->| 
      |              |              |              |       
      |(13) NOTIFY (200 OK)         |              |       
      |------------->|              |              |       
      |(14) 200 OK   |              |              |       
      |<-------------|              |              |       
      |              |              |              |       
             Figure 11 OISP Drops Out at Call Completion Setup 






 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 59] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

    
    
10.3. OISP Drops Out After Call Completion Call is Answered 

   The OISP may need to remain in the signaling path until the call 
   completion call is answered. One way to implement this is to use the 
   REFER method with the Replaces header, as described in [RFC3891]. In 
   this case, once the call completion call is answered (5), the OISP's 
   AS sends a REFER (6) toward the caller with a Replaces header 
   identifying the current dialog between the AS and called party, and 
   Referred-by header identifying the AS. This causes an INVITE (10) to 
   be sent toward the called party, also with Replaces and Referred-by 
   headers. As described in [RFC3891], this causes a new session to be 
   set up with the called party, replacing the existing sessions. As 
   part of this, the original session is torn down (16). Thus, the 
   OISP's resources are removed from the call. 































 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 60] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

    
   Caller           AS             MS        Called Party 
     |              |              |              | 
     |              |              |              | 
     |              |              |              | 
     |(1) Caller listening to announcements, etc  | 
     |.............................|              | 
     |              |              |              | 
     |              |(2) INVITE    |              | 
     |              |---------------------------->| 
     |              |              |              | 
     |              |(3) 183 Ringing              | 
     |              |<----------------------------| 
     |              |              |              | 
     |              |(4) 200 OK    |              | 
     |              |<----------------------------| 
     |              |              |              | 
     |              |(5) ACK       |              | 
     |              |---------------------------->| 
     |              |              |              | 
     |[Called party has answered]  |              | 
     |              |              |              | 
     |(6) REFER (Called Party, Replaces:AS, Referred-by:AS) 
     |<-------------|              |              | 
     |              |              |              | 
     |(7) 202 Accepted             |              | 
     |------------->|              |              | 
     |              |              |              | 
     |(8) NOTIFY (100 Trying)      |              | 
     |------------->|              |              | 
     |              |              |              | 
     |(9) 200 OK    |              |              | 
     |<-------------|              |              | 
     |              |              |              | 
     |(10) INVITE (Replaces:AS, Referred-by:AS)   | 
     |------------------------------------------->| 
     |              |              |              | 
     |(11) 200 OK   |              |              | 
     |<-------------------------------------------| 
     |              |              |              | 
     |(12) ACK      |              |              | 
     |------------------------------------------->| 
     |              |              |              | 
     |[Called Party replaces existing dialog from Step 2 with new one] 
     |              |              |              | 
     |              |              |              | 
     |(13) RTP [Called and Calling Party are now connected ] 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 61] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

     |............................................| 
     |              |              |              | 
     |              |              |              | 
     |[ Remainder of steps cleanup dialogs between Caller-AS and AS-
   Called ] 
     |              |              |              | 
     |(14) NOTIFY (200 OK)         |              | 
     |------------->|              |              | 
     |              |              |              | 
     |(15) 200 OK   |              |              | 
     |<-------------|              |              | 
     |              |              |              | 
     |              |(16) BYE (as a result of receiving Replaces) 
     |              |<----------------------------| 
     |              |              |              | 
     |              |(17) 200 OK   |              | 
     |              |---------------------------->| 
     |              |              |              | 
     |(18) BYE      |              |              | 
     |<-------------|              |              | 
     |              |              |              | 
     |(19) 200 OK   |              |              | 
     |------------->|              |              | 
     |              |              |              | 
          Figure 12 OISP Drops After Call Completion is Answered 

    
    
10.4. OISP Drops Out After Interaction with Called Party 

   In this scenario, the OISP needs to interact with the called party, 
   then desired to remove its resources from the call. Collect calls 
   are one example where this might be used. This also uses REFER with 
   Replaces. The OISP places a call to the called party, and 
   interactions between OISP resources (automated or human) occur. The 
   OISP then sends a REFER with Replaces and Referred-by to the calling 
   party, which then sends an INVITE as described for the previous 
   scenario. 

   In this scenario, the OISP has one media session (1) with the caller 
   and another (2) with the called party. After interactions have been 
   completed, the OISP initiates the transfer by sending a REFER (3) 
   with Replaces and Referred-by headers. This causes the caller's UA 
   to send a corresponding INVITE (7) containing those headers. As with 
   the previous scenario, this causes initiation of a new session 
   replacing the existing session, as well as teardown (10) of the 
   existing session. 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 62] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

    
   Caller                AS                  MS                Called 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |[ Calling party has some RTP session with MS ]             | 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |(1) RTP            |                   |                   | 
     |.......................................|                   | 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |[ Called party has different RTP session with MS ]         | 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |                   |                   |(2) RTP            | 
     |                   |                   |...................| 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |[ AS initiates transfer with REFER ]   |                   | 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |(3) REFER (to called, Replaces:AS, Referred-by:AS)         | 
     |<------------------|                   |                   | 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |(4) 202 Accepted   |                   |                   | 
     |------------------>|                   |                   | 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |(5) NOTIFY (trying)|                   |                   | 
     |------------------>|                   |                   | 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |(6) 200 OK         |                   |                   | 
     |<------------------|                   |                   | 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |[ Replaces header causes Called to replace old call with new ] 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |(7) INVITE (Replaces:AS, Referred-by:AS)                   | 
     |---------------------------------------------------------->| 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |(8) 200 OK (SDP-called)                |                   | 
     |<----------------------------------------------------------| 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |(9) ACK            |                   |                   | 
     |---------------------------------------------------------->| 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |[ Calling and Called are now talking directly ]            | 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 63] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |                   |                   |                   |  
   |[As a result of Replaces operation, called ends session with MS] 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |                   |(10) BYE (as a result of processing Replaces) 
     |                   |<--------------------------------------| 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |                   |(11) 200 OK        |                   | 
     |                   |-------------------------------------->| 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |[AS ends session with Calling]         |                   | 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |(12) BYE           |                   |                   | 
     |<------------------|                   |                   | 
     |(13) 200 OK        |                   |                   | 
     |------------------>|                   |                   | 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
     |(14) NOTIFY (200 OK)                   |                   | 
     |------------------>|                   |                   | 
     |(15) 200 OK        |                   |                   | 
     |<------------------|                   |                   | 
     |                   |                   |                   | 
       Figure 13 OISP Drops Out After Interaction With Called Party 

    
    
10.5. OISP Remains in Path 

   In some cases, the OISP desires to maintain its elements in the 
   signaling path and possibly in the media path as well for the 
   duration of the call completion call. One possible reason for doing 
   this is so that the caller can request to be returned to the OISP 
   for additional services after the call has completed. 

   The figure below begins with the caller already connected to OISP 
   resources. The AS initiates call completion in steps 2 through 5 by 
   sending an INVITE toward the called party. The AS then sends a re-
   INVITE toward the caller to update the SDP, and step 9 shows the 
   media session established between the caller and the called party, 
   and in step 10 clears the previous session with the MS. When the 
   called party hangs up in step 12, the AS responds. In step 14, the 
   AS has the opportunity to redirect the caller to a MS or other 
   resource to offer additional services, but in this case simply 
   clears the dialog with the caller.  

    
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 64] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   Caller           AS             MS        Called Party 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |(1) Caller has media session with MS        | 
      |.............................|              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |AS initiates call completion |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |(2) INVITE    |              | 
      |              |---------------------------->| 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |(3) 180 Ringing              | 
      |              |<----------------------------| 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |(4) 200 OK    |              | 
      |              |<----------------------------| 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |(5) ACK       |              | 
      |              |---------------------------->| 
      |              |              |              | 
      |Called party has answered    |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |(6) re-INVITE |              |              | 
      |<-------------|              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |(7) 200 OK    |              |              | 
      |------------->|              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |(8) ACK       |              |              | 
      |<-------------|              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |(9) Media Session            |              | 
      |............................................| 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |(10) BYE      |              | 
      |              |------------->|              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |(11) 200 OK   |              | 
      |              |<-------------|              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |Called party hangs up        |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |(12) BYE      |              | 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 65] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

      |              |<----------------------------| 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |(13) 200 OK   |              | 
      |              |---------------------------->| 
      |              |              |              | 
      |AS clears call back to Caller|              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |(14) BYE      |              |              | 
      |<-------------|              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |(15) 200 OK   |              |              | 
      |------------->|              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
                 Figure 14 OISP Remains in Signaling Path 

    
10.6. Return of Call to OISP 

   In some cases, it is desirable that the caller be able to request, 
   typically via keypad stimulus such as the octothorpe or pound sign, 
   to be returned to the OISP operator (human or automated). One way 
   this can be accomplished is for the OISP to use KPML [RFC4730] to 
   subscribe to the desired keypress. The flow presented here assumes 
   that the calling UA, or an intermediary acting on its behalf, 
   supports this event package, and is able to detect the desired 
   keypress. Examples of such intermediaries include back to back user 
   agents (B2BUAs) and Session Border Controllers (SBCs). Another 
   option is for the OISP to insert some element such as a MS into the 
   media stream, which is capable of detecting and notifying the 
   desired keypress. 

   In (1) the caller has already been connected to called party via the 
   AS. In (2), the AS subscribes to KPML events from the caller's UA. 
   Note that in some environments, this could be intercepted and acted 
   upon by intermediaries such as B2BUAs or SBCs. As long as this does 
   not interfere with notification, this is transparent to the OISP. 
   When the caller presses the specified keypress to request return to 
   the OISP, a NOTIFY (6) is sent to the AS. At this time, the OISP can 
   perform whatever actions are necessary, such as perhaps sending a 
   re-INVITE or UPDATE to move the media session to an OISP resource. 

    



 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 66] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   Caller           AS             MS        Called Party 
       |              |              |              | 
       |(1) Caller connected to called via 3PCC     | 
       |............................................| 
       |              |              |              | 
       |(2) SUBSCRIBE (KPML body specifying "#")    | 
       |<-------------|              |              | 
       |(3) 200 OK    |              |              | 
       |------------->|              |              | 
       |              |              |              | 
       |(4) NOTIFY (result of subscription)         | 
       |------------->|              |              | 
       |(5) 200 OK    |              |              | 
       |<-------------|              |              | 
       |              |              |              | 
       |[ Some time passes ]         |              | 
       |              |              |              | 
       |[ Caller wants back to OISP, hits "#" ]     | 
       |              |              |              | 
       |              |              |              | 
       |(6) NOTIFY (KPML body specifying "#")       | 
       |------------->|              |              | 
       |(7) 200 OK    |              |              | 
       |<-------------|              |              | 
                     Figure 15 Return of Call to OISP 

    
    
10.7. PSTN Origination 

   The following example shows a call from a PSTN caller. In this case, 
   the incoming IAM is translated at the PSTN gateway to a SIP INIVTE. 
   Though not specifically shown, the INVITE contains the IAM 
   encapsulated in a MIME body, and any ISUP parameters are mapped to 
   SIP headers and/or parameters as described in [T1679]; additionally 
   the mechanisms described in this document are also applied, such as 
   encoding of the trunk group information in the Contact header per 
   [RFC4904]. 

    







 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 67] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   EO          GW          AS          MS1         MS2    Called Party 
    |           |           |           |           |           | 
    |           |           |           |           |           | 
    |           |           |           |           |           | 
    |Incoming ISUP Call     |           |           |           | 
    |           |           |           |           |           | 
    |(1) IAM    |           |           |           |           | 
    |---------->|           |           |           |           | 
    |           |(2) INVITE (GW SDP)    |           |           | 
    |           |---------->|           |           |           | 
    |           |           |(3) INVITE (GW SDP)    |           | 
    |           |           |---------->|           |           | 
    |           |           |(4) 200 OK (MS1 SDP)   |           | 
    |           |           |<----------|           |           | 
    |           |           |(5) ACK    |           |           | 
    |           |           |---------->|           |           | 
    |           |(6) 183 Session Progress (MS1 SDP) |           | 
    |           |<----------|           |           |           | 
    |(7) ACM    |           |           |           |           | 
    |<----------|           |           |           |           | 
    |           |(8) PRACK  |           |           |           | 
    |           |---------->|           |           |           | 
    |           |(9) 200 OK |           |           |           | 
    |           |<----------|           |           |           | 
    |           |(10) RTP Session       |           |           | 
    |           |.......................|           |           | 
    |E.g. Front End Announcements       |           |           | 
    |           |           |           |           |           | 
    |           |           |(11) BYE   |           |           | 
    |           |           |<----------|           |           | 
    |           |           |(12) 200 OK|           |           | 
    |           |           |---------->|           |           | 
    |           |           |           |           |           | 
    |           |           |(13) INVITE (GW SDP)   |           | 
    |           |           |---------------------->|           | 
    |           |           |(14) 200 OK (MS2 SDP)  |           | 
    |           |           |<----------------------|           | 
    |           |           |(15) ACK   |           |           | 
    |           |           |---------------------->|           | 
    |           |(16) UPDATE (MS2 SDP)  |           |           | 
    |           |<----------|           |           |           | 
    |           |(17) 200 OK|           |           |           | 
    |           |---------->|           |           |           | 
    |           |(18) RTP Session       |           |           | 
    |           |...................................|           | 
    |           |           |(19) INVITE|           |           | 
    |           |           |---------------------------------->| 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 68] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

    |           |           |(20) 183 Session Progress          | 
    |           |           |<----------------------------------| 
    |           |           |(21) PRACK |           |           | 
    |           |           |---------------------------------->| 
    |           |           |(22) 200 OK|           |           | 
    |           |           |<----------------------------------| 
    |           |(23) UPDATE (Called SDP)           |           | 
    |           |<----------|           |           |           | 
    |           |(24) 200 OK|           |           |           | 
    |           |---------->|           |           |           | 
    |           |           |(25) BYE   |           |           | 
    |           |           |<----------------------|           | 
    |           |           |(26) 200 OK|           |           | 
    |           |           |---------------------->|           | 
    |           |(27) RTP Session       |           |           | 
    |           |...............................................| 
    |           |           |(28) 200 OK|           |           | 
    |           |           |<----------------------------------| 
    |           |           |(29) Ack   |           |           | 
    |           |           |---------------------------------->| 
    |           |(30) 200 OK|           |           |           | 
    |           |<----------|           |           |           | 
    |           |(31) ACK   |           |           |           | 
    |           |---------->|           |           |           | 
    |(32) ANM   |           |           |           |           | 
    |<----------|           |           |           |           | 
    |           |           |           |           |           | 
                        Figure 16 PSTN Origination 

    
    
    
10.8. PSTN Termination 

   The following example shows a call which results in call completion 
   to a destination on the PSTN. In Step 17 the AS sends an INVITE 
   toward the PSTN gateway which results in an IAM being sent which 
   initiates the PSTN call leg. 

    







 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 69] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   Calling Party    AS          MS1         MS2         GW          EO 
         |           |           |           |           |           | 
         |           |           |           |           |           | 
         |           |           |           |           |           | 
         |Incoming SIP call      |           |           |           | 
         |           |           |           |           |           | 
         |(1) INVITE (Caller SDP)|           |           |           | 
         |---------->|           |           |           |           | 
         |           |(2) INVITE (Caller SDP)|           |           | 
         |           |---------->|           |           |           | 
         |           |(3) 200 OK (MS1 SDP)   |           |           | 
         |           |<----------|           |           |           | 
         |           |(4) ACK    |           |           |           | 
         |           |---------->|           |           |           | 
         |(5) 183 Session Progress (MS1 SDP) |           |           | 
         |<----------|           |           |           |           | 
         |(6) PRACK  |           |           |           |           | 
         |---------->|           |           |           |           | 
         |(7) 200 OK |           |           |           |           | 
         |<----------|           |           |           |           | 
         |(8) RTP Session        |           |           |           | 
         |.......................|           |           |           | 
         |E.g. Front End Announcements       |           |           | 
         |           |           |           |           |           | 
         |           |(9) BYE    |           |           |           | 
         |           |<----------|           |           |           | 
         |           |(10) 200 OK|           |           |           | 
         |           |---------->|           |           |           | 
         |           |           |           |           |           | 
         |           |(11) INVITE (Caller SDP)           |           | 
         |           |---------------------->|           |           | 
         |           |(12) 200 OK (MS2 SDP)  |           |           | 
         |           |<----------------------|           |           | 
         |           |(13) ACK   |           |           |           | 
         |           |---------------------->|           |           | 
         |(14) UPDATE (MS2 SDP)  |           |           |           | 
         |<----------|           |           |           |           | 
         |(15) 200 OK|           |           |           |           | 
         |---------->|           |           |           |           | 
         |(16) RTP Session       |           |           |           | 
         |...................................|           |           | 
         |           |(17) INVITE|           |           |           | 
         |           |---------------------------------->|           | 
         |           |           |           |           |(18) IAM   | 
         |           |           |           |           |---------->| 
         |           |           |           |           |(19) ACM   | 
         |           |           |           |           |<----------| 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 70] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

         |           |(20) 183 Session Progress          |           | 
         |           |<----------------------------------|           | 
         |           |(21) PRACK |           |           |           | 
         |           |---------------------------------->|           | 
         |           |(22) 200 OK|           |           |           | 
         |           |<----------------------------------|           | 
         |(23) UPDATE (GW SDP)   |           |           |           | 
         |<----------|           |           |           |           | 
         |(24) 200 OK|           |           |           |           | 
         |---------->|           |           |           |           | 
         |           |           |           |           |(25) ANM   | 
         |           |           |           |           |<----------| 
         |           |(26) 200 OK|           |           |           | 
         |           |<----------------------------------|           | 
         |           |(27) Ack   |           |           |           | 
         |           |---------------------------------->|           | 
         |(28) 200 OK(GW SDP)    |           |           |           | 
         |<----------|           |           |           |           | 
         |(29) ACK   |           |           |           |           | 
         |---------->|           |           |           |           | 
         |(30) RTP Session       |           |           |           | 
         |...............................................|           | 
         |           |           |           |           |(31) REL   | 
         |           |           |           |           |<----------| 
         |           |           |           |           |(32) RLC   | 
         |           |           |           |           |---------->| 
         |           |(33) BYE   |           |           |           | 
         |           |<----------------------------------|           | 
         |           |(34) 200 OK|           |           |           | 
         |           |---------------------------------->|           | 
         |(35) BYE   |           |           |           |           | 
         |<----------|           |           |           |           | 
         |(36) 200 OK|           |           |           |           | 
         |---------->|           |           |           |           | 
         |           |           |           |           |           | 
                        Figure 17 PSTN Termination 

    
    
10.9. Call Completion By Releasing Call Back to PSTN 

   This example shows how when a call is received from the PSTN, call 
   completion can be achieved by releasing the call back to the PSTN to 
   have a PSTN switch initiate the call completion call. This allows 
   call completion to occur in the PSTN, and completely drops the call 
   from the OISP. The PSTN feature which supports this is called 
   Release To Pivot; other implementations may also exist. The 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 71] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   gateway's connection to the PSTN needs to be specifically 
   provisioned to support this feature. There is currently no standard 
   describing the invocation of this feature using SIP; nor does this 
   document intend to do this. Rather, it intends to illustrate one way 
   in which it might be done. This flow appears as the equivalent of a 
   blind transfer with the PSTN gateway as the originator; the key 
   thing is that the PSTN gateway needs to understand this as a request 
   for Release to Pivot or equivalent PSTN feature.  

    





































 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 72] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   EO             GW             AS             MS1           EO-2 
    |              |              |              |              | 
    |              |              |              |              | 
    |              |              |              |              | 
    |Incoming ISUP Call           |              |              | 
    |              |              |              |              | 
    |(1) IAM       |              |              |              | 
    |------------->|              |              |              | 
    |              |(2) INVITE (GW SDP)          |              | 
    |              |------------->|              |              | 
    |              |              |(3) INVITE (GW SDP)          | 
    |              |              |------------->|              | 
    |              |              |(4) 200 OK (MS1 SDP)         | 
    |              |              |<-------------|              | 
    |              |              |(5) ACK       |              | 
    |              |              |------------->|              | 
    |              |(6) 183 Session Progress (MS1 SDP)          | 
    |              |<-------------|              |              | 
    |(7) ACM       |              |              |              | 
    |<-------------|              |              |              | 
    |              |(8) PRACK     |              |              | 
    |              |------------->|              |              | 
    |              |(9) 200 OK    |              |              | 
    |              |<-------------|              |              | 
    |              |(10) RTP Session             |              | 
    |              |.............................|              | 
    |E.g. Front End Announcements |              |              | 
    |              |              |              |              | 
    |              |              |(11) BYE      |              | 
    |              |              |<-------------|              | 
    |              |              |(12) 200 OK   |              | 
    |              |              |------------->|              | 
    |              |(13) REFER (call completion number)         | 
    |              |<-------------|              |              | 
    |              |(14) 202 Accepted            |              | 
    |              |------------->|              |              | 
    |              |(15) NOTIFY(trying)          |              | 
    |              |------------->|              |              | 
    |              |(16) 200 OK   |              |              | 
    |              |<-------------|              |              | 
    |(17) REL      |              |              |              | 
    |<-------------|              |              |              | 
    |(18) RLC      |              |              |              | 
    |------------->|              |              |              | 
    |              |(19) NOTIFY(200 OK)          |              | 
    |              |------------->|              |              | 
    |              |(20) 200 OK   |              |              | 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 73] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

    |              |<-------------|              |              | 
    |(21) IAM, etc.|              |              |              | 
    |---------------------------------------------------------->| 
    |              |              |              |              | 
    |              |              |              |              | 
         Figure 18 Call Completion By Releasing Call Back to PSTN 

    
    
11. Operator Services Example Call Flows 

   The following call flows provide examples of how specific operator 
   services could be implemented using the mechanisms described in this 
   document. The purpose is to illustrate one way to implement these 
   services using the proposed signaling mechanisms.  

11.1. Network Controlled Coin Calls 

   This flow depicts a SIP based OISP handling calls from a network 
   controlled coin station. The OISP needs to determine the coinage 
   deposited by the station. Note that ''smart'' coin stations do not 
   require interaction with the OISP. This discussion only addresses 
   control of TDM based network controlled coin stations.  

   The configuration is as follows. Network controlled coin stations 
   are connected to TDM based end offices (EOs) using special access 
   lines, the characteristics of which are not important to this 
   discussion. The EO exchanges signaling with the station over this 
   access line, but does not perform the coin control. Operator 
   Services switches historically provide the control for these types 
   of calls, and the EO connects to the Operator Switch via special 
   coin control trunks. The EO translates between coin access and coin 
   trunk signaling. 

   The signaling includes coin station control and coin deposit 
   indications. The OISP sends coin station control signaling to the 
   coin station to instruct it to collect coins, return coins, etc. The 
   coin deposit signaling is sent by the coin station toward the OISP, 
   and indicates the coinage inserted by the user. 

   Coin station control signaling includes signals such as coin 
   collect, coin return, operator ringback, etc. The way in which these 
   signals are conveyed depends on the type of coin trunk being used. 
   For SS7 ISUP coin trunks, these are conveyed using the Service 
   Activation (SAP) ISUP parameter. For MF trunks using multiwink coin 
   signaling, these signals are conveyed using a series MF hook state 
   transition events known as ''winks''. For MF trunks using Expanded 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 74] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   Inband Signaling (EIS), these signals are conveyed as tone bursts in 
   conjunction with a wink. The relevant MF signaling is described in 
   [GR506]. 

   When the AS communicates with the GW using encapsulated ISUP, such 
   as for SS7 ISUP trunks and cases where the gateway internally 
   converts between MF and encapsulated ISUP, then the AS can convey 
   coin control signaling to the GW using encapsulated ISUP that 
   includes the appropriate Service Activation Parameter (SAP) value. 
   This encapsulated ISUP is carried within the SIP signaling sent to 
   the GW. 

   For multiwink signaling, the AS could connect the GW to an MS and 
   instruct the MS to play the appropriate signals using an existing 
   mechanism such as netann, VXML, etc. As mentioned above, the 
   multiwink signals are MF hook transition events. [RFC5244] defines a 
   mechanism for signaling the ABCD states used to represent MF hook 
   states within an RTP stream.  The MS would generate the appropriate 
   ''telephone-event'' RTP payload format packets defined in RFC 5244 in 
   response to requests from the AS. In order to be able to render 
   these events on the TDM size, the GW would need to implement 
   reception of RFC 5244 packets.  

   For EIS signaling, an MS could be used as above, generating the 
   appropriate tones and hook transitions in response to requests from 
   the AS. The hook transition events as above could be accomplished 
   using RFC 5244. The audio tones could be transmitted using an audio 
   codec such as G.711. Alternatively, RFC 4733 ''tone'' RTP payload 
   format packets as described in Section 4 of that document could be 
   used. Finally, if RFC 4733 codepoints were registered with IANA for 
   these tones, they could be sent using the ''telephone-event'' RTP 
   payload format.  

   Coin deposit signaling is sent as tone bursts on the trunk from the 
   coin station towards the OISP, regardless of whether ISUP or MF 
   signaling is used on the trunk. The tones could be detected by the 
   GW, or they could be detected by a MS that has been connected by the 
   AS. In either case, some mechanism is needed in order for the AS to 
   request detection and for the MS to report detection of these tones. 
   KPML [RFC4730] and VXML both natively support the reporting of DTMF 
   tones, but there is currently no standardized way to represent the 
   tone bursts representing the deposit of coins. The possibility 
   arises to represent the coin deposit tones in KPML or VXML by 
   mapping them to some set of service provider specified DTMF digits. 

    

 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 75] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

    
    

   The following examples illustrates the use of encapsulated ISUP to 
   convey the coin control signaling, and detection of coin deposit 
   signals at the GW, with the GW reporting coin deposits using KPML. 
   As identified above, other alternatives are possible. 

   In the following flow, the EO is the end office service the coin 
   station, the PSTN GW is the GW terminating the voice trunks and 
   signaling from the EO, the AS is the OIS AS, the MS is a media 
   server in the OIS provider, and the called party is self 
   explanatory. 

   In step 1, the coin station (not shown) has signaled a call request 
   to the EO, which in turn selects a coin trunk toward the OISP PSTN 
   GW, and initiates the corresponding signaling. In steps 2 through 4, 
   the PSTN GW sends an INVITE to the AS, which accepts the call. 

   In steps 5 through 7, the AS sends a SIP INFO message containing 
   encapsulated ISUP, which contains an ISUP SAP parameter with the 
   Feature Code Indicator (FCI) indicating ''Network Service Attached'', 
   which is an instruction to the coin station that an Operator 
   Services System has been connected. The GW sends the corresponding 
   PSTN signaling back toward the coin station. 

   In steps 8 through 10, the AS using the same procedures sends 
   encapsulated ISUP with a SAP parameter with the FCI indicating ''Coin 
   Collect'' which instructs the coin station to collect and report on 
   coin deposits. 

   The coin deposits will be signaled as tones over the trunk, so the 
   AS in steps 11 through 14 subscribes to these events at the GW. This 
   example assumes an extension to KPML to support these tones, but the 
   mechanism is the same even if a new event package were defined. 

   In 15, the user deposits coins into the station, and these events 
   are signaled by the EO to the GW. In step 16, the GW sends SIP 
   NOTIFY messages to the AS for each such event. 

   When the AS determines that adequate payment has been collected, it 
   routes the call, as depicted in steps 18 through 24.  

   In this example, the caller exceeds his credit, and hangs up the 
   phone. This is represented by steps 25 through 27. 


 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 76] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   Using similar signaling, the OISP sends an Operator Hold and 
   Ringback request toward the station, to ''keep the line open'' and to 
   ring the station so that the user can be prompted to pay the 
   exceeded credit. This is represented in steps 28 through 36. In this 
   case, the honest user inserts the required coins, and this is 
   signaled to the OISP in steps 39 through 41. From steps 42 on, the 
   line is ''released''. 

    






































 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 77] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

            EO        GW        AS        MS   Called Party 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |(1) Call Request Indication  |         | 
             |-------->|         |         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(2) INVITE         |         | 
             |         |-------->|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(3) 200 OK         |         | 
             |         |<--------|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(4) ACK  |         |         | 
             |         |-------->|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(5) INFO (ISUP),SAP FCI=Network Service Attach) 
             |         |<--------|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(6) 200 OK         |         | 
             |         |-------->|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |(7) corresponding MF or ISUP signaling | 
             |<--------|         |         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(8) INFO (ISUP,SAP FCI=Coin Collect) 
             |         |<--------|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(9) 200 OK         |         | 
             |         |-------->|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |(10) corresponding MF or ISUP signaling| 
             |<--------|         |         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |(11) SUBSCRIBE (KPML body specifying coin deposit tones) 
             |<------------------|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |(12) 200 OK        |         |         | 
             |------------------>|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |(13) NOTIFY (result of subscription)   | 
             |------------------>|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |(14) 200 OK        |         |         | 
             |<------------------|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |[ User inserts coins ]       |         | 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 78] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |(15) Coin deposit signals    |         | 
             |-------->|         |         |         | 
          |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(16) NOTIFY (KPML body specifying coin deposit 
   tones) 
             |         |-------->|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(17) 200 OK        |         | 
             |         |<--------|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |[ AS determines adequate coinage, routes call ] 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |         |(18) INVITE        | 
             |         |         |------------------>| 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |         |(19) 180 Ringing   | 
             |         |         |<------------------| 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |         |(20) 200 OK        | 
             |         |         |<------------------| 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |         |(21) ACK |         | 
             |         |         |------------------>| 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(22) re-INVITE (Called SDP)  | 
             |         |<--------|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(23) 200 OK        |         | 
             |         |-------->|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(24) RTP |         |         | 
             |         |.............................| 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |[ Conversation, exceeds credit ]       | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |[ Caller hangs up, tries to run ]      | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |(25) Disconnect Request      |         | 
             |-------->|         |         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(26) INFO (ISUP,SAP FCI=Disconnect Request) 
             |         |-------->|         |         | 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 79] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(27) 200 OK        |         | 
             |         |<--------|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |[ AS requests Connection Hold and Ringback ] 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(28) INFO (ISUP,SAP FCI=Hold Request) 
             |         |<--------|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(29) 200 OK        |         | 
             |         |-------->|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |(30) corresponding MF or ISUP signaling| 
             |<--------|         |         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |(31) Hold Acknowledge        |         | 
             |-------->|         |         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(32) INFO (ISUP,SAP FCI=Hold Acknowledge) 
             |         |-------->|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(33) 200 OK        |         | 
             |         |<--------|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(34) INFO (ISUP,SAP FCI=Ringback Request) 
             |         |<--------|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(35) 200 OK        |         | 
             |         |-------->|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |(36) corresponding MF or ISUP signaling| 
             |<--------|         |         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |[ User inserts coins ]       |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |(37) NOTIFY (KPML body specifying coin deposit tones) 
             |------------------>|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |(38) 200 OK        |         |         | 
             |<------------------|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |[ Billing satisfied ]        |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(39) INFO (ISUP,SAP FCI=Hold Release Request) 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 80] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

             |         |<--------|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(40) 200 OK        |         | 
             |         |-------->|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |(41) corresponding MF or ISUP signaling| 
             |<--------|         |         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |[ User hangs up ]  |         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |(42) Disconnect Request      |         | 
             |-------->|         |         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(43) INFO (ISUP,SAP FCI=Disconnect Request) 
             |         |-------->|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(44) 200 OK        |         | 
             |         |<--------|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(45) BYE |         |         | 
             |         |<--------|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |(46) 200 OK        |         | 
             |         |-------->|         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |(47) corresponding MF or ISUP signaling| 
             |<--------|         |         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |         |(48) BYE |         | 
             |         |         |------------------>| 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |         |(49) 200 OK        | 
             |         |         |<------------------| 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
             |         |         |         |         | 
                  Figure 19 Network Controlled Coin Call 

    

    

11.2. Busy Line Verification and Interrupt 

   An existing PTSN service is Busy Line Verification and Interrupt. In 
   the Busy Line Verification (BLV) Service, a customer obtains 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 81] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   operator assistance to determine if a called line is in use. In 
   Operator Interrupt Service, the operator provides a BLV Service and, 
   if requested by the caller, interrupts a conversation in progress 
   and relays a message. If the interrupted party is willing to hang 
   up, the call can be reoriginated by the caller to the called party. 
   At the caller's request, the connection between the caller and the 
   called party can be reinitiated and handled by the operator as a 
   Call Completion Service.  

11.2.1. PSTN Target 

   Currently, BLV/I is handled by the Operator Services System placing 
   calls via special BLV/I trunk toward the target. Use of this type of 
   trunk results in the Operator Services System being able to monitor 
   a scrambled version of the target's conversation, and being able to 
   barge in to speak to the target. In this document, the focus of 
   BLV/I toward a PSTN target is on having the OIS components such as 
   OWS and AS be able to communicate with the EO via BLV/I trunks. For 
   IP targets, SIP capabilities are used. 

   The following figure depicts a BLV/I call to a PSTN target. In steps 
   (1) through (8) the caller is routed to an AS which performs 3PCC to 
   connect this caller to an operator workstation.  

   The operator determines the user's request, and initiates (9) a call 
   toward the target via a BLV/I trunk. Ensuring that the call is 
   routed via the correct type of trunk can be handled the same using 
   SIP as in the PSTN; that is, by prepending specified routing digits 
   to the target number. The operator is bridged by the EO onto the 
   target's line, during which time no voice is sent toward the caller. 
   A one way connection can be explicitly signaled, or the operator 
   workstation can simply not send RTP at this time. The operator 
   workstation or GW implements a scrambler so that only the presence 
   or absence of speech can be determined, and the operator then 
   reports to the caller on the status. If there is speech, then the 
   operator reports that the line is busy, and may offer to interrupt 
   the caller. 

   If this is desired, the operator removes the scrambler, and 
   indicates to the target of the caller's desire to call them, and 
   drops off. The operator informs the caller of the result, and drops 
   the caller, who may then re attempt the call. The option where the 
   OISP offers the call as a call completion service is not shown here, 
   but this poses no unique requirements with respect to call 
   completion. 


 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 82] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

    
          Caller      AS        WS        GW 
             |[ Caller dials 0+ or 0- ]    | 
             |(1) INVITE         |         | 
             |-------->|         |         | 
             |(2) 180 Ringing    |         | 
             |<--------|         |         | 
             |         |(3) INVITE         | 
             |         |-------->|         | 
             |         |(4) 200 OK         | 
             |         |<--------|         | 
             |         |(5) ACK  |         | 
             |         |-------->|         | 
             |(6) 200 OK         |         | 
             |<--------|         |         | 
             |(7) ACK  |         |         | 
             |-------->|         |         | 
             |(8) RTP  |         |         | 
             |...................|         | 
             |[ Caller is now connected to operator ] 
             |         |         |(9) INVITE 
             |         |         |-------->| 
             |         |         |(10) 200 OK 
             |         |         |<--------| 
             |         |         |(11) ACK | 
             |         |         |-------->| 
             |         |         |(12) RTP | 
             |         |         |.........| 
             |[ Operator is now connected to BLV trunk ] 
             |         |         |(13) BYE | 
             |         |         |-------->| 
             |         |         |(14) 200 OK 
             |         |         |<--------| 
             |[ Operator drops caller ] 
             |(15) BYE |         |         | 
             |<------------------|         | 
             |(16) 200 OK        |         | 
             |------------------>|         | 
             |[ Caller may or may not place call, OISP uninvolved ] 
                               

                      Figure 20 BLV/I to PSTN Target 

    



 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 83] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

11.2.2. SIP Target 

   The following depicts a BLV/I call to a SIP target. Note that this 
   is included mainly for completeness. The characteristics of POTS 
   based subscribers support such a service, but many of those 
   characteristics may not be applicable to SIP based endpoints. POTS 
   access can carry only a single call at a time; as a packet switched 
   technology SIP does not share this inherent restriction. There is 
   typically a strong association between a physical POTS line and the 
   address (phone number) used to reach it, while a SIP address of 
   record is a logical address which can be registered with various 
   endpoints, even simultaneously. Also, attempts towards such a set of 
   devices can be tried in sequence or in parallel; thus the same 
   concept of ''busy'' does not carry directly from POTS access to SIP. 
   The ambiguity of ''busy'' may also have impacts on the ''interrupt'' 
   aspect of this service. 

   The approach detailed here is based on that described in the 
   PacketCable Residential SIP Telephony Feature Specification, [RST]. 
   The main aspects of this approach include using the Event dialog 
   package [RFC4235] to determine whether the device has an active 
   call, and using the Join header in order to bridge onto the current 
   conversation for monitoring and interrupting the user. Additional 
   aspects include the operator workstation performing the scrambling 
   function, and the use of a preconfigured network asserted 
   workstation identity from which the user device must accept and 
   process the BLV/I related requests. 

   Steps 1 through 8 represent an incoming call to the OISP being 
   connected to an operator workstation. The operator interacts with 
   the caller and determines the BLV/I request. 

   In steps 9 through 12, the operator workstation subscribes to the 
   Dialog event package at the target party's UA, and receives a NOTIFY 
   identifying any active dialogs.  

   In 13 through 16, the workstation sends an INVITE with a Join header 
   [RFC3911] to bridge onto the active call. The INVITE includes a P-
   Asserted-Identity value corresponding to the value prearranged 
   between the OISP and the target's home provider. The user devices 
   are configured to accept SUBSCRIBEs for Dialog event package and 
   INVITEs with the Join header when the P-Asserted-Identity contains 
   this value. Thus, the user device accepts the Join header. 
   Initially, the workstation acts in a receive only mode, and further, 
   implements an audio scrambler such that speech is distinguishable as 
   such, but is non intelligible. Thus the operator can determine 
   whether the person at the target device is in active conversation. 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 84] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   During this time, the workstation does not exchange media with the 
   caller, who may be put on hold (not show here). 

   The operator can then report the status to the caller, and offer the 
   Interrupt service. If accepted, the scrambling function is removed 
   from the voice path between operator and target, and the operator 
   ''barges in'' on the conversation, informs the target party of the 
   caller's request, and asks whether the target would like to accept 
   the call. The operator can then drop the session with the target and 
   inform the caller about the target's response. There is of course no 
   guarantee of the target's or caller's subsequent actions. 




































 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 85] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

    
          Caller      AS        WS      Target 
             |[ Caller dials 0+ or 0- ]    | 
             |(1) INVITE         |         | 
             |-------->|         |         | 
             |(2) 180 Ringing    |         | 
             |<--------|         |         | 
             |[ Simplified flow for brevity - straight to WS ] 
             |         |(3) INVITE         | 
             |         |-------->|         | 
             |         |(4) 200 OK         | 
             |         |<--------|         | 
             |         |(5) ACK  |         | 
             |         |-------->|         | 
             |(6) 200 OK         |         | 
             |<--------|         |         | 
             |(7) ACK  |         |         | 
             |-------->|         |         | 
             |(8) RTP  |         |         | 
             |...................|         | 
             |[ Caller is now connected to operator ] 
             |         |         |(9) SUBSCRIBE (Dialog) 
             |         |         |-------->| 
             |         |         |(10) 200 OK 
             |         |         |<--------| 
             |         |         |(11) NOTIFY (Dialog state) 
             |         |         |<--------| 
             |         |         |(12) 200 OK 
             |         |         |-------->| 
             |         |         |(13) INVITE (Join, dialog id) 
             |         |         |-------->| 
             |         |         |(14) 200 OK 
             |         |         |<--------| 
             |         |         |(15) ACK | 
             |         |         |-------->| 
             |         |         |(16) RTP | 
             |         |         |.........| 
             |         |         |(17) BYE | 
             |         |         |-------->| 
             |         |         |(18) 200 OK 
             |         |         |<--------| 
             |[ Operator informs caller of target's disposition ] 
             |(19) BYE |         |         | 
             |<------------------|         | 
             |(20) 200 OK        |         | 
             |------------------>|         | 
                       Figure 21 BLV/I to SIP Target 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 86] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

    

    

11.3. Inward Calls 

   Typically, operator services are provided by the OISP serving a 
   user's originating provider. In some cases, another OISP must be 
   involved. One example is BLV/I, where an OISP can only invoke BLV/I 
   for targets served by providers that the OISP serves. In the case of 
   a caller desiring to invoke BLV/I to a target served by a different 
   provider, the caller's request would be routed to the same OISP as 
   usual. That OISP would identify the OISP serving the target, and 
   initiate an ''inward'' call to an operator in that OISP, and request 
   that operator to perform the BLV/I. For this feature, the initiating 
   OISP acts as the caller to the OISP serving the target. Currently, 
   Inward calls are originated by operators at operator workstations, 
   and terminated to operators at operator workstations. 

   Inward calls need to be distinguishable from calls from subscribers 
   that are routed to operators. Further, inward calls should be 
   accepted only from other OISPs, never from subscribers, and only 
   from those OISPs with appropriate business relationships. 

   The request should be screened based on the identity of originator. 
   Since the From header can easily be spoofed, a network-asserted 
   identity should be used for this. Within trust domains that use the 
   P-Asserted-Identity [RFC3325] header as a network asserted identity, 
   this header should be used for this purpose. Alternatively, the SIP 
   Identity mechanism [RFC4474] can be used in domains where this is 
   used for network asserted identity. Rather than maintain lists of 
   every possible URI for which Inward requests are allowed, the 
   decision could be based on the domain in the SIP URI. Requests from 
   domains corresponding only to OISPs which are authorized to make 
   Inward requests would be accepted. 

   In the current North American PSTN, the digits dialed by the 
   operator placing Inward call can be used to identify the type of 
   service being requested, so that the destination OISP can properly 
   handle the request. These digits are known as Operator Special 
   Dialed Code (OSDC) digits. Thus, the Request-URI should include the 
   OSDC digits, and the AS should populate the Request-URI as a SIP URI 
   which includes the SIP domain of the destination OISP as well as the 
   OSDC code. 



 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 87] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   For Inward calls to PSTN based OISPs, the call should be placed via 
   a PSTN gateway, and should appear to the destination OISP the same 
   as any other Inward call. 

    

11.4. Intercept 

   Intercept service provides the capability for a customer to be 
   informed that a working number is no longer in service or why a 
   working number is no longer in service. Basically, it provides 
   announcements to the caller, which may be fixed or dynamic. 
   Currently in the North American PSTN, Intercept may be handled by 
   individual end offices, or may be sent to Operator Services Systems, 
   which have specialized resources for handling such requests. When a 
   call reaches a PSTN switch for a number which requires Intercept 
   treatment, that switch, known as the ''intercepted switch'', initiates 
   an Intercept request for that ''intercepted number''. The request to 
   an OISP specifies the intercepted number, and an ''intercept type'', 
   which provides an indication of the general reason for intercept. 
   Often, the OISP needs to consult an ''intercept database'' to 
   determine specific processing for a particular intercepted number. 

   Currently, with MF, dedicated Intercept trunk groups are typically 
   used, so the call is implicitly identified as such. The ANI digits 
   identify the intercepted number, and the II digits identify the 
   intercept type. For ISUP, dedicated trunk groups may or may not be 
   used, but the SAP parameter identifies the intercept type, and the 
   Called Party Number parameter identifies the intercepted number. In 
   both cases, the key information conveyed include identification of 
   the request as intercept, intercept type, and intercepted number. 

11.4.1. Intercept Request Via SIP 

   Intercept requests to a SIP based OISP need to convey the same 
   information currently conveyed. Such requests can be treated as a 
   call forwarded to an Intercept service. Thus, the Request-URI should 
   identify the request as Intercept, as well as conveying the 
   intercept type. The currently defined values for intercept type 
   include regular, blank, and trouble. Prepending these with 
   ''intercept-'' in the left hand side of the Request-URI unambiguously 
   identifies the request as intercept and conveys the intercept type. 
   Treating this as a redirection, the SIP History-Info header can be 
   used to convey the intercepted number. An example of such an INVITE 
   (relevant fields only) follows: 


 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 88] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   INVITE sip:intercept-trouble@oisp-c.example.com SIP/2.0 
   From: <sip:7327581111@provider-a.example.com>;tag=1234567 
   To: <sip:7327582222@provider-b.example.com> 
   History-Info: <sip:7327582222@provider-b.example.com>; index=1 
   Content-Type: application/sdp 
   Content-Length: ... 
    

   Upon receiving such a request, the AS would typically perform any 
   required processing, including database lookups, and generate a 
   request to a MS to play the specified announcement. The conventions 
   described in [RFC4240] can be used for this. 

   An example high level message flow follows: 

































 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 89] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

     Intercepted domain    AS             MS 
             |              |              | 
             |              |              | 
             |              |              | 
   [ Receives a call requiring Intercept service ] 
             |              |              | 
             |              |              | 
             |(1) INVITE ( r-URI->intercept type, Hist- 
                           Info=intercepted number ) 
             |------------->|              | 
             |              |              | 
             |              |(2) INVITE (r-URI->RFC 4240 annc) 
             |              |------------->| 
             |              |              | 
             |              |(3) 200 OK    | 
             |              |<-------------| 
             |              |              | 
             |              |(4) ACK       | 
             |              |------------->| 
             |              |              | 
             |(5) 183 Session Progress     | 
             |<-------------|              | 
             |              |              | 
             |(6) RTP (announcements)      | 
             |.............................| 
             |              |              | 
             |Caller hangs up              | 
             |              |              | 
             |              |              | 
             |(7) BYE       |              | 
             |------------->|              | 
             |              |              | 
             |(8) 200 OK    |              | 
             |<-------------|              | 
             |              |              | 
             |              |(9) BYE       | 
             |              |------------->| 
             |              |              | 
             |              |(10) 200 OK   | 
             |              |<-------------| 
             |              |              | 
             |              |              | 
                    Figure 22 Intercept Request Via SIP 

    

    
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 90] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

11.4.2. Intercept Request Via PSTN 

   When intercept requests are received from PSTN interfaces, the PSTN 
   gateway needs to translate the incoming signaling to SIP. The 
   preferred approach is to have the PSTN gateway construct an INVITE 
   request of the form described above for requests received via SIP. 
   This method requires additional functionality on the part of the 
   gateway, but the AS only needs to recognize one type of INVITE 
   request for Intercept. 

   Alternatively, the gateway could construct an INVITE containing 
   encapsulated ISUP, in which the Called Party Number and SAP fields 
   are most significant. Also, the Request-URI should contain the 
   Called Party Number. With this method, the PSTN gateway treats the 
   INVITE the same as other INVITEs, but requires the AS to recognize 
   this as an Intercept request by examining the encapsulated ISUP body 
   contents. 

    




























 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 91] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   Intercepted 
    Switch         PSTN GW          AS             MS 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |[ Receives a call requiring Intercept service ] 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |(1) IAM ( CdPN digits=intcptd number, CdPN NOA=op req,   
                 SAP=intcpt type ) 
      |------------->|              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |(2) INVITE (see above) 
      |              |------------->|              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |(3) INVITE (r-URI->RFC 4240 annc) 
      |              |              |------------->| 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |(4) 200 OK    | 
      |              |              |<-------------| 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |(5) ACK       | 
      |              |              |------------->| 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |(6) 183 Session Progress     | 
      |              |<-------------|              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |(7) ACM       |              |              | 
      |<-------------|              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |(8) RTP (announcements)      | 
      |              |.............................| 
      |              |              |              | 
      |(9) TDM (announcements)      |              | 
      |..............|              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |Caller hangs up              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |(10) REL      |              |              | 
      |------------->|              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |(11) BYE      |              | 
      |              |------------->|              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |(12) 200 OK   |              | 
      |              |<-------------|              | 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 92] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

      |              |              |              | 
      |(13) RLC      |              |              | 
      |<-------------|              |              | 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |(14) BYE      | 
      |              |              |------------->| 
      |              |              |              | 
      |              |              |(15) 200 OK   | 
      |              |              |<-------------| 
      |              |              |              | 
                   Figure 23 Intercept Request Via PSTN 

    

    

11.5. Operator Assisted Collect Call 

   The following call flow provides examples of how a specific operator 
   service, Operator Assisted Collect Call, could be implemented using 
   the mechanisms described in this document. The purpose is to 
   illustrate one way to implement this service using the proposed 
   signaling mechanisms. In practice, this particular service could be 
   implemented in an automated fashion without human intervention.  

    

    



















 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 93] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

    
   Caller     Proxy       AS        WS      Called      MS        ACD 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Caller dials 0+ or 0- ]    |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(1) INVITE         |         |         |         |         | 
      |------------------>|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(2) 100 Trying     |         |         |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ AS determines operator is needed, performs 3PCC ]        | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(3) INVITE         |         |         | 
      |         |         |-------------------------------------->| 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(4) 3xx redirect to WS where selected 
   operator registered 
      |         |         |<--------------------------------------| 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(5) INVITE         |         |         | 
      |         |         |-------->|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(6) 200 OK         |         |         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(7) ACK  |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |-------->|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(8) 200 OK         |         |         |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(9) ACK  |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |------------------>|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Caller is now connected to operator ]|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(10) RTP |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |.............................|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Operator determines calling's request and places on hold]| 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 94] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(11) re-INVITE (HOLD)        |         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(12) 200 OK        |         |         | 
      |         |         |-------->|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(13) ACK |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ AS logic determines announcements should be played instead ] 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(14) INVITE (play announcements)       | 
      |         |         |---------------------------->|         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(15) 200 OK (SDP-MS)         |         | 
      |         |         |<----------------------------|         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(16) ACK |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |---------------------------->|         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(17) reINVITE (SDP-MS)       |         |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(18) 200 OK (SDP-calling)    |         |         |         | 
      |------------------>|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(19) ACK |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(20) RTP (MS plays announcements to calling)     |         | 
      |.................................................|         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Operator calls called party ]        |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |(21) INVITE        |         | 
      |         |         |         |-------->|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |(22) 200 OK        |         | 
      |         |         |         |<--------|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |(23) ACK |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |-------->|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |(24) RTP |         |         | 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 95] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

      |         |         |         |.........|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Called agrees to accept charges ]    |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Operator takes Calling off hold ]    |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(25) re-INVITE (un-HOLD)     |         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ AS logic directs Calling from MS back to WS ]  |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(26) re-INVITE (SDP-ws)      |         |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(27) 200 OK        |         |         |         |         | 
      |------------------>|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(28) 200 OK        |         |         | 
      |         |         |-------->|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(29) ACK |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(30) ACK |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(31) RTP |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |.............................|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ AS releases MS ] |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(32) BYE |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |---------------------------->|         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(33) 200 OK        |         |         | 
      |         |         |<----------------------------|         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Calling and Called both have RTP session with WS ]       | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ WS bridges conversations together internally ] |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 96] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

      |[ After brief interlude WS transfers Calling directly to Called 
   ] 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ then drops out ] |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(34) REFER (to called)       |         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(35) 202 Accepted  |         |         | 
      |         |         |-------->|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(36) NOTIFY (trying)         |         | 
      |         |         |-------->|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(37) 200 OK        |         |         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Replaces header causes Called to replace old call with new ] 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(38) INVITE (replaces: WS )  |         | 
      |         |         |------------------>|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(39) 200 OK (SDP-called)     |         | 
      |         |         |<------------------|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(40) ACK |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |------------------>|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |(41) BYE |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |<--------|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |(42) 200 OK        |         | 
      |         |         |         |-------->|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ The following interactions synch up SDP - optimization 
   possible ] 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(43) re-INVITE (SDP-called)  |         |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(44) 200 OK (SDP-calling)    |         |         |         | 
      |------------------>|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 97] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

      |(45) ACK |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(46) re-INVITE (SDP-calling) |         | 
      |         |         |------------------>|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(47) 200 OK        |         |         | 
      |         |         |<------------------|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(48) ACK |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |------------------>|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(49) RTP |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |.......................................|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Calling and Called are now talking directly ]  |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(50) NOTIFY (Call completed) |         | 
      |         |         |-------->|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(51) 200 OK        |         |         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Operator now drops out ]   |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |(52) BYE |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |-------->|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |(53) 200 OK        |         | 
      |         |         |         |<--------|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ AS remains in signaling path until call ends ] |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(54) BYE |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |------------------>|         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(55) BYE |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |------------------>|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(56) 200 OK        |         |         | 
      |         |         |<------------------|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(57) 200 OK        |         |         |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         |         | 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 98] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |         | 
     
    
                Figure 24   Operator Assisted Collect Call 

    

   The caller initiates the call by dialing 0+ or 0-.  

   The call is routed to the AS. The AS examines the calling party 
   number and calling party's home provider, which are derived from the 
   P-Asserted-Identity header. The charge number is also needed, in 
   case the caller's service is determined by agreements with another 
   party, such as the caller's employer. The employer may have a large 
   number of calling identities representing its employees, which are 
   covered under its agreement with the OISP. Rather than provision 
   every possible calling number/identity with the OISP (and this may 
   be constantly changing), the ability to pass a charge number would 
   allow the OISP to determine whether this charge number has any 
   associated treatment on a per charge number basis. 

   In any case, in our example, the AS examines the request and 
   determines that the call is for an operator assisted collect call. 
   Typically a MS could be initially connected to prompt the user for 
   the type of call. This step is omitted in this example. 

   The AS performs third party call control (3PCC). It sends a 18x 
   response towards the caller. It needs to initiate a call leg to an 
   operator workstation. It populates the selection criteria in an 
   INVITE message (the exact mechanism for this is under study) which 
   it sends to the ACD server in (3). The ACD server identifies the 
   best match available operator and returns the contact information 
   for the workstation where that operator is currently registered in a 
   3xx redirection response.  

   In (5) the AS sets up a call to the workstation identified by the 
   ACD server, and using 3PCC connects the caller to the WS, resulting 
   in an RTP session in (10). 

   The operator determines the caller's requested number, and sends an 
   INVITE toward the AS to put the caller on hold. The logic in the AS 
   determines that instead the caller should be connected to custom 
   announcements, and in (14) through (20) creates a session between 
   the caller and a MS. 

 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                  [Page 99] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   Meanwhile, in (21) the WS places a call to the called party, and 
   asks whether the called party would accept the charges for a collect 
   call. In this example, the called party agrees to the request.  

   In (25), the operator takes the caller off hold (recall that it 
   believes it has placed the caller on hold). The AS, in (26) through 
   (33), performs 3PCC, and removes the caller from the MS which is 
   playing custom announcements, and reconnects the caller back to the 
   WS. The WS uses its own internal bridging functionality to 
   conference the operator, calling, and called parties.  

   After a brief interlude, the operator initiates a transfer of the 
   calling and called parties directly together using a REFER in (34) 
   through (37). The AS, performing 3PCC, utilizes the SIP Replaces 
   mechanism beginning in (38) to complete the transfer. When the 
   transfer is complete, the operator drops out completely. Note that 
   the AS, performing 3PCC, remains in the signaling path until the 
   call is torn down in (54) through (57). 

    

11.6. Operator Assisted Third Party Billing 

   The Operator Assisted Third Party Billing service allows a caller to 
   request billing of a call to a third party. In such a service, the 
   caller calls the operator, who places a call to the billed party to 
   obtain authorization for billing. If authorized, the OISP places the 
   call to the called party, and bills it to the billed party. This 
   document focuses on the call flow and SIP signaling, and does not 
   discuss the billing mechanisms. 

   In 1 through 8 below, the caller is connected to the operator. In 9 
   through 14, the operator places the caller on hold, and in 15 
   through 18 the operator calls the billed party to ask for 
   authorization. In 21, the operator un-holds the caller and informs 
   of the authorization. In 18 the operator initiates a call to the 
   called party via the AS by sending a REFER to the AS. 

    








 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                 [Page 100] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

    
   Caller     CSCF       AS        WS      Billed    Called 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Caller dials 0+ or 0- ]    |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(1) INVITE         |         |         |         | 
      |------------------>|         |         |         | 
      |(2) 100 Trying     |         |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ AS determines operator is needed, performs 3PCC ] 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(3) INVITE         |         | 
      |         |         |-------->|         |         | 
      |         |         |(4) 200 OK         |         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         | 
      |         |         |(5) ACK  |         |         | 
      |         |         |-------->|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(6) 200 OK         |         |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         | 
      |(7) ACK  |         |         |         |         | 
      |------------------>|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Caller is now connected to operator ]|         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(8) RTP  |         |         |         |         | 
      |.............................|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Operator determines caller's request and places on hold] 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(9) re-INVITE (HOLD)         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         | 
      |         |         |(10) 200 OK        |         | 
      |         |         |-------->|         |         | 
      |         |         |(11) ACK |         |         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ AS could optionally send caller to advertisements vs hold ] 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                 [Page 101] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

      |(12) re-INVITE (HOLD)        |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         | 
      |(13) 200 OK        |         |         |         | 
      |------------------>|         |         |         | 
      |(14) ACK |         |         |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Operator calls billed party ]        |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |(15) INVITE        | 
      |         |         |         |-------->|         | 
      |         |         |         |(16) 200 OK        | 
      |         |         |         |<--------|         | 
      |         |         |         |(17) ACK |         | 
      |         |         |         |-------->|         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |(18) RTP |         | 
      |         |         |         |.........|         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Charges OK, operator disconnects billed party ]| 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         |       
      |         |         |         |(19) BYE |         |       
      |         |         |         |-------->|         |       
      |         |         |         |(20) 200 OK        |       
      |         |         |         |<--------|         |       
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Operator informs AS of result, un-HOLDs caller ] 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(21) re-INVITE(result, un-HOLD) 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(22) re-INVITE(un-HOLD)      |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         | 
      |(23) 200 OK        |         |         |         | 
      |------------------>|         |         |         | 
      |(24) ACK |         |         |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(25) 200 OK        |         | 
      |         |         |-------->|         |         | 
      |         |         |(26) ACK |         |         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                 [Page 102] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

      |(27) RTP |         |         |         |         | 
      |.............................|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Operator informs caller, transfers AS to initiate call ] 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(28) REFER         |         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         | 
      |         |         |(29) 202 Accepted  |         | 
      |         |         |-------->|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(30) NOTIFY (trying)         | 
      |         |         |-------->|         |         | 
      |         |         |(31) 200 OK        |         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ AS places call to called party, notifies WS on success ] 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(32) INVITE        |         | 
      |         |         |---------------------------->| 
      |         |         |(33) 180 |         |         | 
      |         |         |<----------------------------| 
      |         |         |(34) 200 OK        |         | 
      |         |         |<----------------------------| 
      |         |         |(35) ACK |         |         | 
      |         |         |---------------------------->| 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |(36) re-INVITE     |         |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         | 
      |(37) 200 OK        |         |         |         | 
      |------------------>|         |         |         | 
      |(38) ACK |         |         |         |         | 
      |<------------------|         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(39) NOTIFY (Call completed) | 
      |         |         |-------->|         |         | 
      |         |         |(40) 200 OK        |         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |[ Operator drops]  |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |         |         |         | 
      |         |         |(41) BYE |         |         | 
      |         |         |<--------|         |         | 
      |         |         |(42) 200 OK        |         | 
      |         |         |-------->|         |         | 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                 [Page 103] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

      |         |         |         |         |         | 
    

    

            Figure 25 Operator Assisted Third Party Billed Call 

    

12. Summary and Conclusions 

The intent of this document is to explain how Directory Assistance and 
Operator Services work, and explore how they could be implemented with 
SIP. This includes both SIP originated requests as well as interworking 
with requests from the PSTN.  

A basic architecture utilizing an application server as the primary 
controller, performing third party call control to route incoming calls 
among media servers, operator workstations, etc. is described. 
Interface to the PSTN is described using PSTN gateways which interwork 
between ISUP or MF signaling and SIP. 

Operator services in the North American PSTN often utilize MF trunks. 
As there is currently no specific specification for MF/SIP 
interworking, we assume that the PSTN gateway performs an internal MF 
to ISUP translation. 

The use of existing SIP mechanisms is described where possible. Some of 
the main mechanisms described include third party call control, the 
REFER method with several extensions (e.g. Replaces), the Join header, 
Netann, and some of the ongoing work in the MEDIACTRL working group. 

Several protocol gaps and issues were identified. These include: 

Originating Line Information/ANI II Digits 

Charge Number 

Coin Deposit Tones 

Carrier Information: ISUP TNS, CIP, and CSI parameters, and ''cic'', 
''dai'' tel URI parameters/ 

For conveyance of coin deposit tones, the document suggests that 
extensions to KPML are one potential option, and shows how KPML could 
be used to this end. Definition of an operator services SIP event 
package is mentioned as another alternative. 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                 [Page 104] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

The desired next steps include soliciting feedback from the IETF 
community on the choices and intended usages of the proposed 
mechanisms.  

 

13. Security Considerations 

This document describes the use of existing and currently proposed 
protocol mechanisms. Detailed security analysis of services provided 
using these mechanisms should be performed, and needs to take into 
account the security implications of the individual mechanisms, which 
are documented in the defining documents for each mechanism. Security 
analysis of service provider use of these mechanisms also needs to take 
into account the interactions between individual mechanisms, as well as 
the overall context, including interactions with other providers, with 
which the provider may have differing levels of trust, in which these 
services are deployed.  

Note that signaling for Operator and Information Services may convey 
information of a private nature, and may also convey information about 
deposit of coins by customers into coin phones. Thus, appropriate 
measures should be taken to ensure the confidentiality, integrity, and 
data origin authenticity of such signaling. 

 

14. IANA Considerations 

This document identifies how existing and currently proposed protocol 
mechanisms can be used, and does not request any action on the part of 
IANA. 

 

15. Acknowledgements 

The authors would like to thank Martin Dolly, Gary Munson, Spencer 
Dawkins, and Cullen Jennings for their review, comments, and advice 
with this document. 

 





 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                 [Page 105] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

16. References 

    

16.1. Normative References 

    

   [RFC3261] Rosenberg, et al, J., "SIP: Session Initiation Protocol", 
             RFC 3261, June 2002. 

   [RFC4474] Peterson, Jennings, "Enhancements for Authenticated 
             Identity Management in the Session Initiation Protocol 
             (SIP)", RFC 4474, August 2006. 

   [RFC3325]   Jennings, et al, "Private Extensions to the Session 
             Initiation Protocol (SIP) for Asserted Identity within 
             Trusted Networks", RFC 3325, November 2002. 

    

16.2. Informative References 

                      

   [CSI]    Loreto, Terril, "Input 3rd-Generation Partnership Project 
             (3GPP) Communications Service Identifiers Requirements on 
             the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", draft-loreto-
             sipping-3gpp-ics-requirements-00.txt, June 2006. (work in 
             progress) 

   [RFC3324] Watson, "Short Term Requirements for Network Asserted 
             Identity", RFC 3324, November 2004. 

   [RFC3263] Rosenberg, Schulzrinne, "Session Initiation Protocol 
             (SIP): Locating SIP Servers", RFC 3263, June 2002. 

   [RFC4240] Burger, et al, "Basic Network Media Services with SIP", 
             RFC 4240, December 2005. 

   [RFC3725]   Rosenberg, et al, "Best Current Practices for Third 
             Party Call Control (3pcc) in the Session Initiation 
             Protocol (SIP)", RFC 3725, April 2004. 




 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                 [Page 106] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   [IMS] 3GPP TS 23.228 V7.4.0 (2006-06) - 3rd Generation Partnership 
             Project; Technical Specification Group Services and System 
             Aspects; IP Multimedia Subsystem (IMS); Stage 2 (Release 
             7) 

   [NSS] American National Standards Institute, Inc., "ANSI Extensions 
             to the Narrowband Signaling Syntax (NSS) - Syntax 
             Definition", ATIS-1000008.2006, January 2006. 

   [RFC4904] Gurbani, et al, "Representing Trunk Groups in tel/sip 
             Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs)", RFC 4904, June 2007. 

   [RFC4730] Burger, Dolly, "A Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Event 
             Package for Key Press Stimulus (KPML)", RFC 4730, November 
             2006. 

   [RST]     PacketCable, " Residential SIP Telephony Feature 
             Specification", PKT-SP-RSTF-I01-060927, September 2006. 

   [RFC4235] Rosenberg, et al, "An INVITE-Initiated Dialog Event 
             Package for the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 
             4235, November 2005. 

   [RFC3911] Mahy, et al, "The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) "Join" 
             Header", RFC 3911, October 2004. 

   [RFC3398] Camarillo, et al, "Integrated Services Digital Network 
             (ISDN) User Part (ISUP) to Session Initiation Protocol 
             (SIP) Mapping", RFC 3398, December 2002. 

   [RFC3840] Rosenberg, et al, "Indicating User Agent Capabilities in 
             the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)", RFC 3840, August 
             2004. 

   [RFC4483] Burger, et al, "A Mechanism for Content Indirection in 
             Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) Messages'', RFC 4483, May 
             2006. 

   [RFC2045] Freed, et al, "Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions 
             (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet Message Bodies'', RFC 
             2045, November 1996. 

   [RFC3204] Zimmerer, et al, "MIME media types for ISUP and QSIG 
             Objects'', RFC 3204, November 2001. 



 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                 [Page 107] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   [RFC3325] Jennings, et al, ''Private Extensions to the Session 
             Initiation Protocol (SIP) for Asserted Identity within 
             Trusted Networks'', RFC 3325, November 2002. 

   [RFC3966] Schulzrinne, H., ''The tel URI for Telephone Numbers'', RFC 
             3966, December 2004. 

   [RFC4244] Barnes, et al, ''An Extension to the Session Initiation 
             Protocol (SIP) for Request History Information'', RFC 4244, 
             November 2005. 

   [RFC4694] Yu, J., ''Number Portability Parameters for the "tel" URI'', 
             RFC 4694, October 2006. 

   [RFC5552] Burke, D. and Scott, M., ''SIP Interface to VoiceXML Media 
             Services'', RFC 5552, May 2009. 

   [DAI] Yu, et al, ''DAI Parameter for the tel URI'', draft-yu-tel-dai-
             07, July 2009. (work in progress) 

   [T1679] Alliance for Telecommunications Industry Solutions (ATIS) 
             Committee T1, ''American National Standard for 
             Telecommunications - Interworking between Session 
             Initiation Protocol (SIP) and Bearer Independent Call 
             Control or ISDN User Part'', ATIS T1.679-2004, June 2004. 

   [PCI] York, et al, ''P-Charge-Info: A Private Header (P-Header) 
             Extension to the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)'', 
             draft-york-sipping-p-charge-info-07, August 2009. (work in 
             progress) 

   [RFC3323] Peterson, J., ''A Privacy Mechanism for the Session 
             Initiation Protocol (SIP)'', RFC 3323, November 2002. 

   [draft-mahy-iptel-cpc] Mahy, R., ''The Calling Party's Category tel 
             URI Parameter (SIP)'', draft-mahy-iptel-cpc-06.txt, March 
             2007. 

   [RFC3891] Mahy, R. et al., ''The Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) 
             "Replaces" Header'', RFC 3891, September 2004. 

   [RFC5079] Rosenberg, J., ''Rejecting Anonymous Requests in the 
             Session Initiation Protocol (SIP)'', RFC 5079, December 
             2007. 



 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                 [Page 108] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

   [draft-patel-dispatch-cpc-oli-parameter] Patel, M., Jesske, R., 
             Dolly, M., ''Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) Parameters 
             for indicating the Calling Party's Category and 
             Originating Line Information'', draft-patel-dispatch-cpc-
             oli-parameter, March 2007. (work in progress). 

   [RFC5009] Ejzak, R., ''Private Header (P-Header) Extension to the 
             Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) for Authorization of 
             Early Media'', RFC 5079, September 2007. 

   [GR506] GR-506-CORE, ''LSSGR: Signaling for Analog Interfaces''. 
             Telcordia Technologies, Issue 2, December 2006. 

    

































 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                 [Page 109] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

Author's Addresses 

      John Haluska 
      Telcordia Technologies, Inc. 
      331 Newman Springs Road 
      Room 2Z-323 
      Red Bank, NJ  07701-5699 
      USA 
    
      Phone: +1 732 758 5735 
      Email: jhaluska@telcordia.com 
    
    
      Renee Berkowitz 
      Telcordia Technologies, Inc. 
      One Telcordia Drive 
      Piscataway, NJ  08854-4157 
      USA 
    
      Phone: +1 732 699 4784 
      Email: rberkowi@telcordia.com 
    
    
      Paul Roder 
      Telcordia Technologies, Inc. 
      One Telcordia Drive 
      Room RRC-4A619 
      Piscataway, NJ  08854-4157 
      USA 
    
      Phone: +1 732 699 6191 
      Email: proder2@telcordia.com 
    
      Wesley Downum 
      Telcordia Technologies, Inc. 
      One Telcordia Drive 
      Piscataway, NJ  08854-4157 
      USA 
    
      Phone: +1 732 699 6201 
      Email: wdownum@telcordia.com 
    
    
      Richard Ahern 
      AT&T Customer Information Services 
      1876 Data Drive 
      Room 314 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                 [Page 110] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

      Hoover, AL  35244 
      USA 
    
      Email: Richard.Ahern@bellsouth.com 
    
    
      Paul Lum Lung 
      Qwest Communications International 
      1801 California Street 
      Suite 1210 
      Denver, CO  80202 
      USA 
    
      Email: paul.lumlung@qwest.com 
    
    
      Marty Cruze 
      Qwest Communications International 
      1600 Seventh Avenue 
      Room 2103 
      Seattle, WA 98191 
      USA 
    
      Email: Marty.Cruze@qwest.com 
    
    
     Nicholas S. Costantino 
     Soleo Communications, Inc. 
     300 Willowbrook Drive 
     Fairport, NY 14450 
    
     Email: ncostantino@soleocommunications.com 
    
    
     Chris Blackwell 
     Verizon 
     1000 Century Tel Dr 
     Room 115 
     Wentzville, MO 63385 
    
     Email: chris.blackwell@verizon.com 
    
 
    
     D. E. Scott 
     VoltDelta 
     2401 N. Glassell St. 
 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                 [Page 111] 

Internet-Draft      Information Services Using SIP        November 2010 
    

     Orange, CA  92865-2705 
      
     Email: dscott@voltdelta.com 
 
    










































 
 
Haluska, et al.          Expires May 9, 2011                 [Page 112] 

