


Network Working Group                                       M. Boucadair
Internet-Draft                                            France Telecom
Intended status: Informational                             S. Matsushima
Expires: November 18, 2011                              Softbank Telecom
                                                                  Y. Lee
                                                                 Comcast
                                                              O. Bonness
                                                        Deutsche Telekom
                                                               I. Borges
                                                        Portugal Telecom
                                                            May 17, 2011


      Motivations for Stateless IPv4 over IPv6 Migration Solutions
          draft-operators-softwire-stateless-4v6-motivation-01

Abstract

   IPv4 service continuity is one of the most sensitive problems that
   must be resolved by Service Providers during the IPv6 transition
   period - especially after the exhaustion of the public IPv4 address
   space.  Current standardization effort that addresses IPv4 service
   continuity focuses on stateful mechanisms.  This document elaborates
   on the motivations for the need to undertake a companion effort to
   specify stateless IPv4 over IPv6 approaches.  This document does not
   claim that only stateless solutions are required but rather
   acknowledges both stateless and stateful solutions are needed.  The
   selection of the appropriate solution(s) to be deployed depends on
   each Service Provider's context and decision-making process.  It
   should take into account both technical and economical
   considerations.


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."




Boucadair, et al.       Expires November 18, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Solution Motivations                  May 2011


   This Internet-Draft will expire on November 18, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



































Boucadair, et al.       Expires November 18, 2011               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Solution Motivations                  May 2011


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Why Stateless IPv4 over IPv6 Solutions are Needed? . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  Network Architecture Simplification  . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       3.1.1.  Network Dimensioning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       3.1.2.  No Intra-domain Constraint . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       3.1.3.  CPE-to-CPE Communications  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       3.1.4.  Logging - No Need for Dynamic Binding Notifications  .  7
       3.1.5.  No Additional Protocol for Port Control is Required  .  7
       3.1.6.  Support of Multi-Vendor Redundancy . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.2.  Simplification of Qualification Procedures . . . . . . . .  8
     3.3.  Operational Tasks Efficiency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       3.3.1.  Preserve Current Practices . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       3.3.2.  Planned Maintenance Operations . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       3.3.3.  Reliability and Robustness . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.4.  Implicit Host Identification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.5.  No Organizational Impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   4.  Open Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     4.1.  Dependency Between IPv4 and IPv6 Address Assignments . . . 11
     4.2.  IPv4 Port Utilisation Efficiency . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.3.  IPv4 Port Randomization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  Both Stateless and Stateful are Needed . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  Conclusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   9.  Contributors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   10. Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   11. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15




















Boucadair, et al.       Expires November 18, 2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Solution Motivations                  May 2011


1.  Introduction

   When the global IPv4 address space is exhausted, Service Providers
   will be left with an address pool that cannot be increased anymore.
   Many services and network scenarios will be impacted by the lack of
   IPv4 public addresses.  Providing access to the (still limited) IPv6
   Internet only won't be sufficient to address the needs of customers,
   as most of them will continue to access legacy IPv4-only services.
   Service Providers must guarantee their customers that they can still
   access IPv4 contents although they will not be provisioned with a
   global IPv4 address anymore.  Means to share IPv4 public addresses
   are unavoidable [I-D.ietf-intarea-shared-addressing-issues].

   Identifying the most appropriate solution(s) to the IPv4 address
   exhaustion as well as IPv4 service continuity problems and deploying
   them in a real network with real customers is a very challenging and
   complex process for all Service Providers.  There is nothing like a
   "One size fits all" solution or one target architecture that would
   work for all situations.  Each Service Provider has to take into
   account its own context (e.g., service infrastructures), policies and
   marketing strategy (a document that informs Service Providers about
   the impact of the IPv4 address shortage, and provides some
   recommendations and guidelines, is available at [EURESCOM]).

   Current standardization effort that is meant to address this IPv4
   service continuity issue focuses mainly on stateful mechanisms that
   assume the sharing of any global IPv4 address that is left between
   several customers, based upon the deployment of NAT (Network Address
   Translation) capabilities in the network.  Because of some caveats of
   such stateful approaches the Service Provider community feels that a
   companion effort is required to specify stateless IPv4 over IPv6
   approaches.  This document provides elaboration on such need.

   Particularly, this document describes the motivations for stateless
   solutions within the context of an IPv6-enabled network as described
   in [I-D.arkko-ipv6-transition-guidelines].  The following table shows
   the targeted space:














Boucadair, et al.       Expires November 18, 2011               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Solution Motivations                  May 2011


                              +---------------+---------------+
                              | Crossing IPv4 | IPv6-enabled  |
                              |   networks    |    networks   |
                  +-----------+---------------+---------------+
                  | Stateful  |   RFC5571     |    DS-Lite    |
                  | solution  |    (L2TP)     |               |
                  +-----------+---------------+---------------+
                  | Stateless |   RFC5969     |   *Target*    |
                  | solution  |    (6rd)      |   *space *    |
                  +-----------+---------------+---------------+

   From a Service Provider perspective, stateless solutions are more
   attractive because they do less impact the current network operation
   and maintenance model that is widely based on stateless approaches.
   While not all Service Providers environments are the same, a detailed
   case study from one Service Provider
   [I-D.matsushima-v6ops-transition-experience] reports that stateless
   transition solutions can be considerably less expensive than stateful
   transition solutions.  Further elaboration on the hidden costs (e.g.,
   update OSS, management interfaces, mitigation issues to solve issues
   common to all address sharing techniques
   [I-D.ietf-intarea-shared-addressing-issues]) is to be further
   elaborated by each Service Provider.

   It is explicitly acknowledged by the authors of this document that
   both stateful and stateless solutions are required to meet Service
   Providers needs and constraints.


2.  Terminology

   This document makes use of the following terms:

   Stateful 4/6 solution  (or stateful solution in short): denotes a
                       solution where the network maintains user-session
                       states relying on the activation of a NAT
                       function in the Service Providers' network
                       [I-D.ietf-behave-lsn-requirements].  The NAT
                       function is responsible for sharing the same IPv4
                       address among several subscribers and to maintain
                       user-session states.

   Stateless  4/6 solution  (or stateless solution in short): denotes a
                       solution which does not require any user-session
                       state to be maintained by any IP address sharing
                       function in the Service Provider's network.  This
                       category of solutions assumes a dependency
                       between an IPv6 prefix and IPv4 address.  More



Boucadair, et al.       Expires November 18, 2011               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            Solution Motivations                  May 2011


                       precisely, the IPv4 address and the significant
                       bits coding the port range are reflected inside
                       the IPv6 prefix assigned to a port-restricted
                       device.  This can be achieved either by embedding
                       the full IPv4 address and the significant bits in
                       the IPv6 prefix or by applying an algorithmic
                       approach.  In an IPv4 address sharing context,
                       dedicated functions are required to be enabled in
                       the CPE router to restrict the source IPv4 port
                       numbers.  Within this document, "port set" and
                       "port range" terms are used interchangeably.


3.  Why Stateless IPv4 over IPv6 Solutions are Needed?

   This section discusses motivations for preferring a deployment of
   stateless 4/6 solutions.  The technical and operational benefits of
   the stateless solutions are possible because no per-user state is
   maintained by any IP address sharing function in the Service
   Providers networks.

3.1.  Network Architecture Simplification

   The deployment of stateless solutions relies upon the activation of a
   stateless IPv4/IPv6 interconnection function located in the Service
   Provider's network and in CPE routers.  The stateless IPv4/IPv6
   interconnection function is responsible to adapt in a stateless
   fashion IPv4 datagrams into IPv6 ones and vice versa.  The activation
   of this stateless function in the Service Provider's network does not
   introduce any major constraint on the network architecture and its
   engineering.  The following sub-sections elaborate on these aspects.

3.1.1.  Network Dimensioning

   Because no user-state is required, a stateless solution does not need
   to take into account the maximum number of simultaneous user-sessions
   and the maximum number of new user-sessions per second to dimension
   its networking equipment.  Like current network dimensioning
   practices, only considerations related to the customer number,
   traffic trends and the bandwidth usage need be taken into account for
   dimensioning purposes.

3.1.2.  No Intra-domain Constraint

   Stateless IPv4/IPv6 interconnection functions can be ideally located
   at the boundaries of an Autonomous System (e.g., ASBR routers that
   peer with external IPv4 domains); in such case:




Boucadair, et al.       Expires November 18, 2011               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            Solution Motivations                  May 2011


   o  Intra-domain paths are not altered: there is no need to force IP
      packets to cross a given node for instance; intra-domain routing
      processes are not tweaked to direct the traffic to dedicated
      nodes.

   o  Intra-domain communications do not cross any IPv4/IPv6
      interconnection resources.

3.1.3.  CPE-to-CPE Communications

   Another motivation for stateless is it optimizes CPE-to-CPE
   communication in that packets don't go through the interconnection
   function since the address and port mapping has been realized based
   on a well defined mapping schema that is known to all involved
   devices.

3.1.4.  Logging - No Need for Dynamic Binding Notifications

   Network abuse reporting requires traceability.  To provide such
   traceability, prior to IPv4 address sharing, logging the IPv4 address
   assigned to a user was sufficient and generates relatively small
   logs.  The advent of stateful IPv4 address allows dynamic port
   assignment, which then requires port assignment logging.  This
   logging of port assignments can be considerable.

   In contrast, static port assignments do not require such considerable
   logging.  The volume of the logging file may not be seen as an
   important criterion for privileging a stateless approach because
   stateful approaches can also be configured (or designed) to assign
   port ranges and therefore lead to acceptable log volumes.

   If a dynamic port assignment mode is used, dedicated interfaces and
   protocols must be supported to forward binding data records towards
   dedicated platforms.  The activation of these dynamic notifications
   may impact the performance of the dedicated device.  For stateless
   solutions, there is no need for dynamic procedures (e.g., using
   SYSLOG) to notify a mediation platform about assigned bindings.

   Some Service Providers have a requirement to use only existing
   logging systems and to avoid introducing new ones (mainly because of
   CAPEX considerations).  This requirement is easily met with stateless
   solutions.

3.1.5.  No Additional Protocol for Port Control is Required

   The deployment of stateless solution does not require the deployment
   of new dynamic signaling protocols to the end-user CPE in addition to
   those already used.  In particular, existing protocols (e.g., UPnP



Boucadair, et al.       Expires November 18, 2011               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            Solution Motivations                  May 2011


   IGD:2 [UPnP-IGD]) can be used to control the NAT mapping in the CPE.

3.1.6.  Support of Multi-Vendor Redundancy

   Deploying stateful techniques, especially when used in the Service
   Providers networks, constrain severely deploying multi-vendor
   redundancy since very often proprietary vendor-specific protocols are
   used to synchronize state.  This is not an issue for the stateless
   case.  Concretely, the activation of the stateless IPv4/IPv6
   interconnection function does not prevent nor complicate deploying
   devices from different vendors.

   This criterion is very important for Service Providers having a
   sourcing policy to avoid mono-vendor deployments and to operate
   highly-available networks composed on multi-vendors equipment.

3.2.  Simplification of Qualification Procedures

   The introduction of new functions and nodes into operational networks
   follows strict procedures elaborated by Service Providers.  These
   procedures include in-lab testing and field trials.  Because of their
   nature, stateless implementations optimize testing times and
   procedures:

   o  The specification of test suites to be conducted should be
      shorter;

   o  The required testing resources (in terms of manpower) are likely
      to be less solicited that they are for stateful approaches.

   One of the privileged approaches to integrate stateless IPv4/IPv6
   interconnection function consists in embedding stateless capabilities
   in existing operational nodes (e.g., IP router).  In this case, any
   software or hardware update would require to execute non-regression
   testing activities.  In the context of the stateless solutions, the
   non-regression testing load due to an update of the stateless code is
   expected to be minimal.

   For the stateless case, testing effort and non-regression testing are
   to be taken into account for the CPE side.  This effort is likely to
   be lightweight compared to the testing effort, including the non-
   regression testing, of a stateful function which is co-located with
   other routing functions for instance.

3.3.  Operational Tasks Efficiency






Boucadair, et al.       Expires November 18, 2011               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            Solution Motivations                  May 2011


3.3.1.  Preserve Current Practices

   Service Providers require as much as possible to preserve the same
   operations as for current IP networking environments.

   If stateless solutions are deployed, common practices are preserved.
   In particular, the maintenance and operation of the network do not
   require any additional constraints such as: path optimization
   practices, enforcing traffic engineering policies, issues related to
   traffic oscillation between stateful devices, load-balancing the
   traffic or load sharing the traffic among egress/ingress points can
   be used, etc.  In particular:

   o  anycast-based schemes can be used for load-balancing and
      redundancy purposes.

   o  asymmetric routing to/from the IPv4 Internet is natively supported
      and no path-pinning mechanisms have to be additionally
      implemented.

3.3.2.  Planned Maintenance Operations

   Since no state is maintained by stateless IPv4/IPv6 interconnection
   nodes, no additional constraint needs to be taken into account when
   upgrading these nodes (e.g., adding a new service card, upgrading
   hardware, periodic reboot of the devices, etc.).

   In particular, current practices that are enforced to (gracefully)
   reboot or to shutdown routers can be maintained.

3.3.3.  Reliability and Robustness

   Compared to current practices (i.e., without a CGN in place), no
   additional capabilities are required to ensure reliability and
   robustness in the context of stateless solutions.  Since no state is
   maintained in the Service Provider's network, state synchronization
   procedures are not required.

   High availability (including failure recovery) is ensured owing to
   best current practices in the field.

3.4.  Implicit Host Identification

   Service Providers do not offer only IP connectivity services but also
   added value services (a.k.a., internal services).  Upgrading these
   services to be IPv6-enabled is not sufficient because of legacy
   devices.  In some deployments, the delivery of these added-value
   services relies on implicit authentication mechanism based on the



Boucadair, et al.       Expires November 18, 2011               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            Solution Motivations                  May 2011


   source IPv4 address.  Due to address sharing, implicit authentication
   will fail [I-D.ietf-intarea-shared-addressing-issues]; replacing
   implicit authentication with explicit authentication will be seen as
   a non acceptable service regression by the end users (less quality of
   experience).

   When a stateless solution is deployed, implicit authentication for
   internal services is likely to be easier to implement: the implicit
   authentication should be updated to take into account the port range
   and the IPv4 address.  Techniques as those analyzed in
   [I-D.boucadair-intarea-nat-reveal-analysis] are not required for the
   delivery of these internal services if a stateless solution is
   deployed.

3.5.  No Organizational Impact

   Stateless solutions rely on IP-related techniques to share and to
   deliver IPv4 packets over an IPv6 network.  In particular, IPv4
   packets are delivered without any modification to their destination
   CPE.  As such there is a clear separation between the IP/transport
   layers and the service layers; no service interference is to be
   observed when a stateless solution is deployed.  This clear
   separation:

   Facilitates service evolution:  Since the payload of IPv4 packets is
      not altered in the path, services can evolve without requiring any
      specific function in the Service Provider's network;

   Limits vendor dependency:  The upgrade of value-added services does
      not involve any particular action from vendors that provide
      devices embedding the stateless IPv4/IPv6 interconnection
      function.

   No service-related skills are required for network operators who
   manage devices that embed the IPv4/IPv6 interconnection function:  IP
      teams can be in charge of these devices; there is a priori no need
      to create a dedicated team to manage and to operate devices
      embedding the stateless IPv4/IPv6 interconnection function.  The
      introduction of stateless capabilities in the network are unlikely
      to degrade management costs.


4.  Open Questions

   Issues common to all address sharing solutions are documented in
   [I-D.ietf-intarea-shared-addressing-issues].  The following sub-
   sections enumerates some open questions for a CPE-based stateless
   solution.  There are no universal answers to these open questions



Boucadair, et al.       Expires November 18, 2011              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            Solution Motivations                  May 2011


   since each Service Provider has its own constraints (e.g., available
   address pool, address sharing ratio, etc.).

4.1.  Dependency Between IPv4 and IPv6 Address Assignments

   Complete stateless mapping implies that the IPv4 address and the
   significant bits that are used to encode the set of assigned ports
   can be retrieved from the IPv6 prefix assigned to the CPE.  This
   requirement can be addressed by either using the IPv6 prefix also
   used to forward IPv6 traffic natively, or allocating two prefixes to
   the CPE (one that will be used to forward IPv6 traffic natively, and
   the other one to forward IPv4 traffic).

   o  Providing two IPv6 prefixes avoids the complexity that may be
      related to the adaptation of the IPv6 addressing scheme to the
      IPv4 addressing scheme.  The drawback is the need to allocate two
      prefixes instead of one to each CPE and to announce them
      accordingly, possibly at the cost of jeopardizing the routing and
      forwarding efficiencies.

   o  The use of a single prefix to cover both the forwarding of IPv6
      and IPv4-in-IPv6 traffic avoids the need to maintain a double
      information (e.g., for customer identification and management
      purposes and for forwarding table maintenance purposes).  This
      scheme somewhat links strongly the IPv4 addressing scheme to the
      allocated IPv6 prefixes.  For Service Providers requiring to apply
      specific policies on per Address-Family (e.g., IPv4, IPv6), some
      provisioning tools (e.g., DHCPv6 option) may be required to derive
      in a deterministic way the IPv6 address to be used for the IPv4
      traffic based on the IPv6 prefix delegated to the home network.

4.2.  IPv4 Port Utilisation Efficiency

   CGN-based solutions, because they can dynamically assign ports,
   provide better IPv4 address sharing ratio than stateless solutions
   (i.e., can share the same IP address among a larger number of
   customers).  For Service Providers who desire an aggressive IPv4
   address sharing, a CGN-based solution is more suitable than the
   stateless.  However, in case a CGN pre-allocates port ranges, for
   instance to alleviate traceability complexity (see Section 3.1.4) it
   also reduces its port utilization efficiency.

4.3.  IPv4 Port Randomization

   Preserving port randomization [RFC6056] may be more or less difficult
   depending on the address sharing ratio (i.e., the size of the port
   space assigned to a CPE).  Port randomization may be more difficult
   to achieve with a stateless solution than stateful solution.  The CPE



Boucadair, et al.       Expires November 18, 2011              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            Solution Motivations                  May 2011


   can only randomize the ports inside be assigned a fixed port range.

   Other means than the (IPv4) source port randomization to provide
   protection against attacks should be used (e.g., use
   [I-D.vixie-dnsext-dns0x20] to protect against DNS attacks, [RFC5961]
   to improve the robustness of TCP against Blind In-Window Attacks, use
   IPv6).


5.  Both Stateless and Stateful are Needed

   As discussed in Section 3, stateless solutions provide several
   interesting features but they also share their part of drawbacks.
   Trade-off between the positive vs. negative aspects of these
   solutions is left to Service Providers.  Each Service Provider will
   have to select the appropriate solution (stateless, stateful or even
   both) meeting its requirements.

   The following table summarizes why stateful approaches shouldn't be
   the only solution for conveying IPv4 traffic across IPv6 networks.
   The table also aims at showing how stateless approaches can
   complement stateful designs.

                                                +----------+-----------+
                                                | Stateful | Stateless |
   +--------------------------------------------+----------+-----------+
   | Flexible address and port allocation       |    +     |     -     |
   +--------------------------------------------+----------+-----------+
   | Preserve IP engineering and operations     |    -     |     +     |
   | practices                                  |          |           |
   +--------------------------------------------+----------+-----------+


6.  Conclusion

   This document recommends to undertake as soon as possible the
   appropriate standardization effort to specify a stateless IPv4 over
   IPv6 solution.


7.  IANA Considerations

   No action is required from IANA.


8.  Security Considerations

   Except for the less efficient port randomization of Section 4.3 and



Boucadair, et al.       Expires November 18, 2011              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft            Solution Motivations                  May 2011


   routing loops [I-D.ietf-v6ops-tunnel-loops], stateless 4/6 solutions
   are expected to introduce no more security vulnerabilities than
   stateful ones.  Because of their stateless nature, they may in
   addition reduce denial of service opportunities.


9.  Contributors

   The following individuals have contributed to this document:

         Christian Jacquenet
         France Telecom

         Email: christian.jacquenet@orange-ftgroup.com

         Pierre Levis
         France Telecom

         Email: pierre.levis@orange-ftgroup.com

         Masato Yamanishi
         SoftBank BB

         Email: myamanis@bb.softbank.co.jp

         Yuji Yamazaki
         Softbank Mobile

         Email: yuyamaza@bb.softbank.co.jp



10.  Acknowledgments

   Many thanks to the following individuals who provided valuable
   comments:

     +---------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+
     | X. Deng       | W. Dec        | D. Wing       | A. Baudot     |
     | E. Burgey     | L. Cittadini  | R. Despres    | J. Zorz       |
     | M. Townsley   | L. Meillarec  | R. Maglione   | J. Queiroz    |
     | C. Xie        |               |               |               |
     +---------------+---------------+---------------+---------------+








Boucadair, et al.       Expires November 18, 2011              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft            Solution Motivations                  May 2011


11.  Informative References

   [EURESCOM]
              Levis, P., Borges, I., Bonness, O. and L. Dillon L., "IPv4
              address exhaustion: Issues and Solutions for Service
              Providers", March 2010, <http://archive.eurescom.eu/~pub/
              deliverables/documents/P1900-series/P1952/D2bis/
              P1952-D2bis.pdf>.

   [I-D.arkko-ipv6-transition-guidelines]
              Arkko, J. and F. Baker, "Guidelines for Using IPv6
              Transition Mechanisms during IPv6 Deployment",
              draft-arkko-ipv6-transition-guidelines-14 (work in
              progress), December 2010.

   [I-D.boucadair-intarea-nat-reveal-analysis]
              Boucadair, M., Touch, J., and P. Levis, "Analysis of
              Solution Candidates to Reveal the Origin IP Address in
              Shared Address Deployments",
              draft-boucadair-intarea-nat-reveal-analysis-01 (work in
              progress), March 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-behave-lsn-requirements]
              Perreault, S., Yamagata, I., Miyakawa, S., Nakagawa, A.,
              and H. Ashida, "Common requirements for IP address sharing
              schemes", draft-ietf-behave-lsn-requirements-01 (work in
              progress), March 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-intarea-shared-addressing-issues]
              Ford, M., Boucadair, M., Durand, A., Levis, P., and P.
              Roberts, "Issues with IP Address Sharing",
              draft-ietf-intarea-shared-addressing-issues-05 (work in
              progress), March 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-v6ops-tunnel-loops]
              Nakibly, G. and F. Templin, "Routing Loop Attack using
              IPv6 Automatic Tunnels: Problem Statement and Proposed
              Mitigations", draft-ietf-v6ops-tunnel-loops-07 (work in
              progress), May 2011.

   [I-D.matsushima-v6ops-transition-experience]
              Matsushima, S., Yamazaki, Y., Sun, C., Yamanishi, M., and
              J. Jiao, "Use case and consideration experiences of IPv4
              to IPv6 transition",
              draft-matsushima-v6ops-transition-experience-02 (work in
              progress), March 2011.

   [I-D.vixie-dnsext-dns0x20]



Boucadair, et al.       Expires November 18, 2011              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft            Solution Motivations                  May 2011


              Vixie, P. and D. Dagon, "Use of Bit 0x20 in DNS Labels to
              Improve Transaction Identity",
              draft-vixie-dnsext-dns0x20-00 (work in progress),
              March 2008.

   [RFC5961]  Ramaiah, A., Stewart, R., and M. Dalal, "Improving TCP's
              Robustness to Blind In-Window Attacks", RFC 5961,
              August 2010.

   [RFC6056]  Larsen, M. and F. Gont, "Recommendations for Transport-
              Protocol Port Randomization", BCP 156, RFC 6056,
              January 2011.

   [UPnP-IGD]
              UPnP Forum, "Universal Plug and Play (UPnP) Internet
              Gateway Device (IGD) V 2.0", December 2010,
              <http://upnp.org/specs/gw/igd2/>.


Authors' Addresses

   Mohamed Boucadair
   France Telecom
   Rennes,   35000
   France

   Email: mohamed.boucadair@orange-ftgroup.com


   Satoru Matsushima
   Softbank Telecom
   Tokyo
   Japan

   Email: satoru.matsushima@tm.softbank.co.jp


   Yiu Lee
   Comcast
   US

   Email: Yiu_Lee@Cable.Comcast.com









Boucadair, et al.       Expires November 18, 2011              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft            Solution Motivations                  May 2011


   Olaf Bonness
   Deutsche Telekom
   Germany

   Email: Olaf.Bonness@telekom.de


   Isabel Borges
   Portugal Telecom
   Portugal

   Email: Isabel@ptinovacao.pt







































Boucadair, et al.       Expires November 18, 2011              [Page 16]

