
A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3395

        Title:      Remote Network Monitoring MIB Protocol Identifier
                    Reference Extensions
        Author(s):  A. Bierman, C. Bucci, R. Dietz, A. Warth
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       September 2002
        Mailbox:    abierman@cisco.com, cbucci@cisco.com,
                    rdietz@hifn.com, dahoss@earthlink.net
        Pages:      21
        Characters: 43862
        Updates:    2895

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-rmonmib-appverbs-04.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3395.txt


This memo defines extensions to the Protocol Identifier Reference
document for the identification of application verb information.  It
updates the Protocol Identifier Reference document but does not
obsolete any portion of that document.  In particular, it describes
the algorithms required to identify protocol operations (verbs) within
the protocol encapsulations managed with MIBs such as the Remote
Network Monitoring MIB Version 2, RFC 2021.

This document is a product of the Remote Network Monitoring Working
Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

