


Network Working Group                                           B. Frank
Internet-Draft                                              Tridium, Inc
Intended status: Standards Track                      September 11, 2009
Expires: March 15, 2010


                   Chopan - Compressed HTTP Over PANs
                   draft-frank-6lowapp-chopan-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 15, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.









Frank                    Expires March 15, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     Chopan - Compressed HTTP Over PANs     September 2009


Abstract

   This document describes a method for compressing HTTP messages into a
   binary format to be transmitted using UDP over 6LoWPAN wireless
   networks.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.2.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.3.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Datagram Format  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.1.  Format Notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.2.  Request Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.3.  Response Format  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.4.  Compressed Headers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.5.  Mime Type Codes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     2.6.  Example  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   3.  UDP Transmission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   4.  Transaction-Id . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   5.  Caching  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     5.1.  Cache Control  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     5.2.  ETag Validation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     5.3.  Interception Proxy Caching . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     5.4.  Sleeping Nodes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     5.5.  Cache Refresh  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     5.6.  Caching non-GET Methods  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   6.  HTTP to Chopan Gateways  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   7.  Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   8.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24


















Frank                    Expires March 15, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     Chopan - Compressed HTTP Over PANs     September 2009


1.  Introduction

   The Pervasive Internet is a vision that everyday devices with
   microprocessors are woven into the fabric of the Internet.  One of
   the critical emerging technologies in this domain is 6LoWPAN which
   enables low cost, low power devices to communicate using the Internet
   Protocol. 6LoWPAN is the first step towards building the Pervasive
   Internet.  Chopan defines the next step: integrating 6LoWPAN devices
   with the World Wide Web to leverage the massive investment in
   existing URI and HTTP infrastructure.

   Chopan is derived from HTTP with these changes:

   o  UDP: utilizes UDP packets instead of TCP as the underlying
      transport protocol

   o  Binary compression: HTTP headers are compressed into a binary
      format to save bandwidth and buffer space

   o  Interception Caches: transparent caching is used to minimize PAN
      traffic and manage sleeping nodes

   o  Gateways: may be used to translate between full HTTP and Chopan to
      interoperate with the existing Web infrastructure

1.1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

1.2.  Security Considerations

   Discussed in Section 7.

1.3.  Terminology

   6LoWPAN: IPv6 for Low power Personal Area Networks described in
   [RFC4944].

   Compression: translation from of a TCP/HTTP text based message into a
   compressed binary UDP/Chopan message (gateway functionality).

   Decompression: translation from of a binary UDP/Chopan message into a
   TCP/HTTP text based message (gateway functionality).

   Gateway: a node which transparently translates between HTTP and
   Chopan messages.



Frank                    Expires March 15, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     Chopan - Compressed HTTP Over PANs     September 2009


   HTTP: Hyper Text Transfer Protocol described in [RFC2616].

   PAN: Personal Area Network - an IP sub-network with constrained
   bandwidth and/or constrained computing devices.  This specification
   is designed for low power PANs running 6LoWPAN, but Chopan is an
   ideal solution for any network with bandwidth or computing
   restraints.

   Interception Proxy Cache: a node which transparently intercepts HTTP
   requests to an origin server and returns cached responses on its
   behalf.

   Origin Server: the server on which the master version of resource
   resides.

   Resource: an abstract unit of information identified with a URI and
   transported over a network using a MIME typed representation.

   Sleeping Nodes: battery powered network nodes which spend most of
   their time in a hibernation state to converse power.

   TCP: Transmission Control Protocol described in [RFC0793].

   UDP: User Datagram Protocol described in [RFC0768].

   UTF-8: Encoding of Unicode characters compatible with ASCII described
   in [RFC2279]
























Frank                    Expires March 15, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     Chopan - Compressed HTTP Over PANs     September 2009


2.  Datagram Format

   Chopan uses a customized binary encoding for HTTP requests and
   responses to achieve message compression into a UDP packet.  A two
   byte magic number is used to identify the packet as a Chopan message
   - "h6" for requests and "H6" for responses.  Both requests and
   responses allow for zero or more compressed headers.

   Any bytes after the headers in the packet are considered the message-
   body.  The length of the message-body is implied by the packet length
   (the Content-Length header MAY be omitted).  The entire message MUST
   fit with in a single UDP packet.  When running over 6LoWPAN, messages
   SHOULD fit into a single 802.15.4 frame to avoid fragmentation.

2.1.  Format Notation

   Message formats are described as a data structure using the following
   primitive types:

   o  u1: an unsigned 8-bit byte

   o  u2: an unsigned 16-bit integer in network byte order

   o  str: UTF-8 [RFC2279] encoded text, followed by a null terminator
      (0x00) byte

   o  x[]: an sequence of type x which contains zero or more occurrences

   o  x|y: either x OR y

2.2.  Request Format

   A normal HTTP request is composed of a request-line, a set of
   request-headers, and the message-body.  This information is
   compressed in the following binary format:
















Frank                    Expires March 15, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     Chopan - Compressed HTTP Over PANs     September 2009


   request
   {
     u2       magic 0x6836 - ASCII "h6"
     method   method
     str      uri
     header[] headers
     u1       zero byte end of headers
     u1[]     message-body
   }

   method
   {
     u1   method-code
     utf  optional string value only if method-code is 0x80
   }

   The HTTP request-line contains three pieces of information: the
   method, URI, and version.  The URI is encoded as a null-terminated
   UTF-8 string.  Standard request methods are encoded into a byte as
   follows:

   Method         Code   ASCII Char
   ------------   ----   ----------
   DELETE         0x44   D
   GET            0x47   G
   HEAD           0x48   H
   OPTIONS        0x4F   O
   POST           0x50   P
   PUT (Update)   0x55   U
   TRACE          0x54   T
   str value      0x80   -

   Most standard methods are encoded into a single byte, for example
   "GET" is encoded into the ASCII byte 'G'.  If the method code is
   0x80, then it is followed by a null terminated UTF-8 string.

2.3.  Response Format

   A normal HTTP response is composed of a status-line, response-
   headers, and the message-body.  This information is compressed in the
   following binary format:










Frank                    Expires March 15, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     Chopan - Compressed HTTP Over PANs     September 2009


   response
   {
     u2       magic  - ASCII "H6"
     u1       status-code
     header[] headers
     u1       zero byte end of headers
     u1[]     message-body
   }

   The HTTP status code is compressed into a single byte where the top
   3-bits represent the 100s decimal digit, and the bottom 5-bits
   represent the last two decimal digits.  Example of binary mappings:

   1xx  ->  0x2X, b001x_xxxx
   2xx  ->  0x4X, b010x_xxxx
   3xx  ->  0x6X, b011x_xxxx
   4xx  ->  0x8X, b100x_xxxx
   5xx  ->  0xAX, b101x_xxxx
   200  ->  0x40  // OK
   404  ->  0x84  // Not Found
   415  ->  0x4F  // Unsupported Media Type
   416  ->  0x50  // Requested range not satisfiable
   417  ->  0x51  // Expectation Failed

2.4.  Compressed Headers

   Standardized HTTP request and response headers are compressed using
   predefined binary codes.  Compressed headers are encoded as follows:

   header
   {
     u1     header-code (high bit determines encoding of value)
     u2|str value (u2 or str based on header-code high bit)
   }

   Headers are encoded using a 8-bit header-code which represents the
   header name.  If the high bit (0x80) is clear in the header-code,
   then the value is encoded as an unsigned 16-bit integer.  If the high
   bit is set, then the value is encoded as a null terminated UTF-8
   string.  The u2 value encoding allows compression on a header-by-
   header basis.  Refer to the table below how each header utilizes a u2
   value.

   If an HTTP header name does not have a standard binary encoding, then
   it MAY be stripped at the proxy gateway, otherwise it can be passed
   using its string name.  Uncompressed header names are encoded as
   follows:




Frank                    Expires March 15, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     Chopan - Compressed HTTP Over PANs     September 2009


   uncompressed-header
   {
     u1      header-code is 0x7f (u2 val) or 0xff (str val)
     str     name encoded as null terminated string
     u2|str  value
   }

   The following table defines the header codes for standard HTTP
   headers.  Each code has the high bit clear indicating a u2 value.
   Mask the code with 0x80 to obtain the str value code:

   Header              Code  Notes
   ------------------  ----  -------------------------------------------
   End-Of-Headers      0x00  zero indicates no more headers
   Uncompressed        0x7F  name string, u2/string value
   Accept              0x01  u2 val: mime type code
   Accept-Charset      0x02
   Accept-Encoding     0x03
   Accept-Language     0x04
   Accept-Ranges       0x05
   Age                 0x06  u2 val: delta age in seconds
   Allow               0x07
   Authorization       0x08
   Awake-Time          0x09  u2 val: seconds, used with check-in request
   Cache-Control       0x0A  u2 val: max-age in seconds
   Connection          0x0B  unsupported
   Content-Encoding    0x0C
   Content-Language    0x0D
   Content-Length      0x0E  u2 val: bytes; omit to imply by packet size
   Content-Location    0x0F
   Content-MD5         0x10
   Content-Type        0x11  u2 val: mime type code
   Cookie              0x12
   Date                0x13
   ETag                0x14  u2 val: etag is 4 digit upper case hex str
   Expect              0x15  u2 val: uncompressed code 100 is 0x64
   Expires             0x16  should be avoided (use max-age)
   From                0x17
   Host                0x18
   If-Match            0x19  u2 val: etag is 4 digit upper case hex str
   If-Modified-Since   0x1A  should be avoided (use max-age)
   If-None-Match       0x1B  u2 val: etag is 4 digit upper case hex str
   If-Range            0x1C
   If-Unmodified-Since 0x1D  should be avoided (use max-age)
   Last-Modified       0x1E  should be avoided (use age, max-age)
   Location            0x1F
   Max-Forwards        0x20  u2 val: number of hops
   Pragma              0x21  obsolete



Frank                    Expires March 15, 2010                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     Chopan - Compressed HTTP Over PANs     September 2009


   Proxy-Authenticate  0x22
   Proxy-Authorization 0x23
   Range               0x24
   Referer             0x25
   Retry-After         0x26  u2 val: seconds, used with 202 responses
   Server              0x27
   Set-Cookie          0x28
   Sleep-Time          0X29  u2 val: seconds, used for check-in requests
   TE                  0x2A
   Transaction-Id      0x2B  u2 val: same as 4 digit upper case hex str
   Trailer             0x2C  unsupported
   Transfer-Encoding   0x2D
   Upgrade             0x2E
   User-Agent          0x2F
   Vary                0x30
   Via                 0x31
   Warning             0x32  u2 val: uncompressed code 111 is 0x6F
   WWW-Authenticate    0x33

2.5.  Mime Type Codes

   The Accept and Content-Type headers may be compressed into an
   unsigned 16-bit type code using the following table:

   Mime Type                 Code    Notes
   ------------------------  ------  -------------------------------
   application/octet-stream  0xA001  used for arbitrary binary files
   text/plain                0xB001  charset implied to be UTF-8
   text/html                 0xB002  charset implied to be UTF-8
   text/xml                  0xB003  charset implied to be UTF-8
   text/csv                  0xB004  charset implied to be UTF-8

   NOTE: we also need to give thought to what kind of information models
   we use and how they are represented with existing or new MIME types.
   For example we might want to use ASN.1 MIBs, binary oBIX, etc...

2.6.  Example

   Assume the following HTTP request:

   GET /pt07 HTTP/1.1
   Host: sensor2086.acme.com
   Accept: text/plain
   If-None-Match: "3A7F"
   Cache-Control: max-age=900

   The HTTP request above would be compressed into the following
   sequence of hexadecimal bytes:



Frank                    Expires March 15, 2010                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft     Chopan - Compressed HTTP Over PANs     September 2009


   68 36 47 2F 70 74 30 37 00 01 B0 01 1B 3A 7F 0A 03 84 00
   ^     ^  ^                 ^        ^        ^        ^
   |     |  |                 |        |        |        +- End
   |     |  +- URI            |        |        +- Cache-Control
   |     +- GET               |        +- If-None-Match
   +- magic                   +- Accept

   Note that we stripped the Host header and compressed Accept, If-None-
   Match, and Cache-Control into two byte header values.










































Frank                    Expires March 15, 2010                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft     Chopan - Compressed HTTP Over PANs     September 2009


3.  UDP Transmission

   One of the primary characteristics of Chopan is the ability to
   transmit HTTP requests and responses over UDP.  Since HTTP was
   originally designed to be run over TCP, we must make some design
   trade-offs to layer the protocol over an unreliable packet based
   transport.

   Chopin follows the standard HTTP request/response model.  A client
   makes a Chopan request to a server with a request message.  When the
   server receives the request, it sends the client back a response
   message.

   Both the request and response messages MUST fit within one UDP
   packet, as such large message bodies are not supported.  However, the
   Range header may be used to chunk the transfer of resources which do
   not fit a single UDP packet.  When running over 6LoWPAN, messages
   SHOULD fit into a single 802.15.4 frame to avoid fragmentation.

   Because UDP is unreliable, there is no guarantee that a server
   receives a request, nor that a client receives the response.  If a
   client does not receive a response to its request after a reasonable
   amount of time, then it SHOULD retry the request up to three times
   before timing out.  It is therefore possible that the server might
   receive the same request multiple times.  A request is "retry safe"
   if it can be retried multiple times by the client without
   compromising server state.  Idempotent methods like GET and HEAD MUST
   be retry safe.  Methods such as PUT and DELETE should also be retry
   safe since they atomically modify or delete the resource.  Methods
   like POST are typically not retry safe unless coupled with another
   mechanism.  In the next section we examine an extension to HTTP for
   making requests retry safe with the Transaction-Id header.

   UDP does not guarantee message order.  Therefore, it is the client's
   responsibility to impose message ordering if required.  Message
   ordering can be maintained by waiting for a response, before sending
   the next request.  When message ordering is not required, the client
   MAY have multiple simultaneous outstanding requests.  This can
   increase throughput on networks with high latency.  If performing
   concurrent requests, clients SHOULD use the Transaction-Id header to
   match responses to requests.










Frank                    Expires March 15, 2010                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft     Chopan - Compressed HTTP Over PANs     September 2009


4.  Transaction-Id

   Due to the unreliable nature of UDP, requests and responses do not
   have guaranteed delivery or ordering.  This can particularly cause
   problems when a non-idempotent request is received successfully by
   the server, but the response packet is dropped.  In this case the
   client's expected behavior is to retry the request which might cause
   the server to receive the same request multiple times.  For methods
   such as POST which are not implicitly retry-safe, we define a new
   header called Transaction-Id.

   Transaction-Id is a unique identifier generated by the client.  The
   tuple of the client's IP address, port number, and Transaction-Id
   should be globally unique within the transaction's temporal window.
   Any retries initiated by the client MUST include the same transaction
   id in the retry requests.

   When a server receives a request with a Transaction-Id header, it
   MUST pass the identifier back to the client via the response's
   Transaction-Id header.  The server MAY also choose to utilize the
   Transaction-Id to implement "at-most-once" semantics.  It is a server
   local matter to decide how to apply the transaction id for a given
   HTTP method and resource.

   If a client attempts to request a method on the resource which
   requires a Transaction-Id header and fails to specify one, then the
   server SHOULD respond with 400 Bad Request.
























Frank                    Expires March 15, 2010                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft     Chopan - Compressed HTTP Over PANs     September 2009


5.  Caching

   6LoWPAN networks are typified by a gateway device which acts as a
   router or bridge between the PAN and the external IP network.  Often
   the external IP network is physically connected by high a bandwidth
   technology such as Ethernet or WiFi.  The PAN itself typically has
   low bandwidth and is composed of resource constrained nodes.  Often
   times the nodes in a PAN are battery powered, and spend most of their
   time sleeping.

   Because of this physical architecture, it is desirable for the more
   capable nodes in the PAN to serve as caches for the more constrained
   devices.  Effective use of caching enables Chopan to optimize both
   bandwidth on the PAN and power on constrained devices.  In the case
   of a sleeping node, it allows proxies to immediately return cached
   representations of resources.

5.1.  Cache Control

   HTTP [RFC2616] defines a sophisticated caching model in sections 13
   and 14.9.  This model has multiple caching features, often with
   overlapping functionality.  Since Chopan is targeted for resource
   constrained devices, this specification recommends use of a subset of
   the HTTP caching model based on resource age and max-age.

   It is expected that most resources accessed by Chopan are
   representations of sensor data.  The nature of the sensor data
   determines its cache life.  For example a temperature sensor in a
   room is likely to change very slowly, so it might have a cache life
   of fifteen minutes.  But a temperature sensor in an oven might have a
   cache life of only ten seconds before it is considered stale data.
   Chopan uses existing HTTP caching features to give both the client
   and server a say in cache management.

   When an origin server publishes a resource representation via a GET
   request, it SHOULD specify the Age header.  For example if a resource
   represents a sensor, and that sensor was read 4 seconds ago, then the
   Age header should be set to 4 seconds.  If the resource has an age
   less than 1 second, then set the Age header to 0.  The Age header
   SHOULD be compressed into a two byte value if less than 18.2 hours.

   In cases when the origin server has knowledge about the cache life of
   a given resource, it SHOULD set the Cache-Control header with a Max-
   Age directive.  Note that the two byte value encoding of Cache-
   Control is implied to be Max-Age as a number of seconds.  When the
   server specifies Max-Age, it is directing upstream proxies and
   clients how long to cache the resource.  For example if a resource
   specifies an Age of 4 seconds, and a Max-Age of 30 seconds, then the



Frank                    Expires March 15, 2010                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft     Chopan - Compressed HTTP Over PANs     September 2009


   resource should be cached for 26 seconds before it is considered
   stale.

   Clients MAY also specify the Cache-Control header with a Max-Age
   directive on requests.  In this case, the client is directing the
   maximum amount of staleness which may be tolerated.  For example if a
   client requests a resource with a Max-Age of 10 seconds, and the
   resource has an age of 8 seconds, then the server may respond with
   the cached resource.  If however the resource has an age older then
   10 seconds, then the server should refresh its cache.  In the case of
   a proxy cache, this means contacting the origin server.  In the case
   of the origin server, it may require polling the sensor.

   A resource is considered stale if its Age is greater than either Max-
   Age specified by the server or the Max-Age specified by the client.
   If a server node has a cached version of a resource which is stale,
   it SHOULD always attempt to refresh its cache.  If the cache cannot
   be refreshed immediately because of normal operation (for example the
   origin server is a sleeping node), then the stale resource should be
   returned and the Warning header SHOULD be specified with the 110
   status code (response is stale).  If cache refresh fails abnormally
   (for example the origin server cannot be contacted), then the stale
   resource SHOULD be returned and the Warning header specified with the
   111 status code (revalidation failed).

5.2.  ETag Validation

   Key to any caching strategy is cache validation, the mechanism used
   by a client or proxy to refresh its cache with the origin server.
   Often even though a cached resource has expired, the original
   resource hasn't been modified.  But in order to avoid re-transmitting
   the entire resource the client and server must define a mechanism to
   validate the cached copy.  In HTTP this validation may be negotiated
   using either timestamps or entity tags.  Chopen discourages the use
   of timestamps because often nodes do not support time clocks.
   Instead entity tags SHOULD be used for cache validation.

   An entity tag is an opaque hash of a given resource's version.  It is
   defined by the origin server using the ETag header.  If possible, a
   two byte etag should be used to allow for optimal compression.  If an
   etag was specified for a cached resource, then clients and proxies
   SHOULD specify the If-None-Match header on cache refresh.  The server
   SHOULD respond with a 304 (Not Modified) response if the etag has
   been not modified.







Frank                    Expires March 15, 2010                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft     Chopan - Compressed HTTP Over PANs     September 2009


5.3.  Interception Proxy Caching

   In Chopan, caching is done transparently to the client via
   "interception caching".  Interception caching is a commonly used
   technique used to insert HTTP caches between clients and origin
   servers, without requiring client configuration.  Clients send
   packets to the origin server directly, but as these packets are
   routed into the PAN, one of the routing nodes processes the message
   directly on behalf of the origin server.  This architecture requires
   that routing nodes in the PAN are actively examining the packets
   before they are routed to their destination address.

   The downside to using interception caching, is that technically it
   breaks the encapsulation of the IP stack - routing nodes must become
   aware of an application level protocol.  The upside to this design,
   is that client nodes do not have be explicitly configured to know
   about the proxies for every PAN.  Since PANs have the potential to
   add billions of new nodes to the Internet, it seems reasonable to
   trade-off the purity of IP routing within the PAN to maintain the
   simplicity of the Internet at large.

   Interception caches SHOULD use a combination of the destination port
   and the packet's magic two byte marker to sniff Chopan packets.  By
   default we assume Chopan runs on UDP port 80, although proxies SHOULD
   make this configurable.

   The lifecycle of an interception cache request:

   1.  The client sends a request to the origin server

   2.  The interception proxy traps the request

   3.  If the request can be immediately fulfilled by a cached
       representation of that resource in the proxy, then the proxy
       responds directly to client on behalf of the origin server using
       the origin server's IP address

   4.  If the proxy has no cached representation of the resource (or the
       cache has expired), then it makes its own request to the origin
       server for the resource to update its cache, then performs step 3
       to return the cached resource to the client

   5.  Cache might also be actively refreshed periodically (see Cache
       Refresh)

   This lifecycle assumes that the origin server is a powered device
   which is awake during normal operation.  If the origin server is a
   battery powered device then the origin server is mostly likely



Frank                    Expires March 15, 2010                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft     Chopan - Compressed HTTP Over PANs     September 2009


   sleeping.  This use case is discussed further in Sleeping Nodes
   section.

   Interception proxies SHOULD be transparent to the client.  However,
   when a proxy communicates directly with the origin server it has a
   choice to forward the client's original packet (with the client's IP
   address), or to initiate a new request (with the proxy's IP address).
   Proxy's SHOULD initiate new requests using the proxy's own IP
   address.  This means that origin servers are effectively responding
   directly to the proxy with no knowledge of the original client
   request.  The disadvantage of this model is that it breaks end-to-end
   communication principles of the Internet.  However this model
   provides significant advantages:

   o  On 6LoWPAN it keeps IP addressing to intra-PAN nodes which results
      in better compression (since we don't need to pass through the
      external IP address);

   o  It ensures that the response gets routed directly back to the
      proxy for caching;

   o  Gateways which are translating TCP/HTTP into UDP/Chopan do not
      have UDP packets from the client to begin with (rather they are
      translating from a TCP stream)

   o  Sleeping nodes which require active cache refresh must be polled
      directly by the proxy

5.4.  Sleeping Nodes

   PANs commonly include battery powered nodes which spend most of their
   time sleeping to conserve power.  These nodes periodically wake up to
   check sensors, perform computation, and catch up on network
   communications.  Because of their nature, sleeping nodes do not make
   for reliable origin servers.  Chopan handles this use case by
   fronting all sleeping nodes with interception caches.  This allows
   all requests for resources on the sleeping nodes to be transparently
   brokered by proxies.  Proxies then synchronize their caches with the
   sleeping nodes periodically during a "check-in" process.

   The lifecycle for interception caching of sleeping nodes follows the
   standard interception model detailed above.  However, when a request
   is made for a resource the proxy doesn't have in its cache, the
   request cannot be immediately fulfilled.  In this case the proxy
   SHOULD return a 202 Accepted response indicating that background
   processing is required before the request can be completed (waiting
   for the sleeping node to wake up).  The Retry-After header SHOULD be
   set indicating the number of seconds before the request should be



Frank                    Expires March 15, 2010                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft     Chopan - Compressed HTTP Over PANs     September 2009


   tried again.  The retry time should be based on the time it will take
   the sleeping node to wake up, check-in, and give the proxy a chance
   to refresh its cache.  The Retry-After header can be estimated from
   the Awake-Time and Sleep-Time headers (see below).

   Sleeping nodes MUST be configured to check-in with their proxy or
   proxies when they wake up.  This is done by sending a POST request to
   the "/ci" URI of each proxy.  When a proxy node receives a check-in
   request, it SHOULD respond with 200 OK response.  The sleeping node
   SHOULD use standard retry/timeout mechanism to ensure that the
   check-in is received by the proxy.  After the sleeping node has
   checked-in, then the proxy SHOULD poll for all the resources in its
   cache which require refreshing.  This will include all new pending
   resources which resulted in 202 responses.  After the sleeping node
   has given the proxy a chance to refresh its cache, it can go back to
   sleep.

   Sleeping nodes SHOULD specify the Awake-Time and Sleep-Time headers
   in their check-in request.  The Awake-Time header specifies how long
   the node expects to stay awake to give the proxy a chance for cache
   refresh.  The Sleep-Time indicates how long the node expects to sleep
   before the next check-in.  A proxy should expect the next check-in
   after the sum of Awake-Time and Sleep-Time has elapsed - this period
   can then be used for estimating the proxy's Retry-After header.

5.5.  Cache Refresh

   Chopan proxies can take an active or a passive approach to cache
   refresh.  In a passive model, stale resources are allowed to expire
   and are eventually flushed from the cache.  New requests for the
   resources are forwarded to the origin server, and the response is
   used to refresh the cache.  On the other hand, the proxy can actively
   poll origin servers to refresh cached resources independent of client
   requests.

   For sleeping nodes, proxies MUST actively refresh their cache.  This
   is required because there are only limited windows of opportunity
   while the node is awake for the proxy to refresh resources.

   When the origin server is a powered node, either active or passive
   cache refresh may be used.  Using active refresh to proactively keep
   caches refreshed can potentially decrease the latency of external
   requests.

   Cached resources can be in one of the following states:

   o  Pending: these are resources on sleeping nodes which have resulted
      in a 202 response.  Eventually we expect to poll the node on



Frank                    Expires March 15, 2010                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft     Chopan - Compressed HTTP Over PANs     September 2009


      check-in and turn them into fresh resources or invalid resources.

   o  Fresh: these are resources with an Age less than both the client's
      and server's configured Max-Age.

   o  Stale: these are resources with an Age which exceeds either the
      client's or server's Max-Age.  The proxy may continue to maintain
      stale resources in the cache for some period of time.

   o  Flushed: resources may be flushed from a cache at any time.
      Normally stale resources are flushed after a timeout period.
      However LRU caches may flush fresh resources if buffer space is
      exceeded.

   o  Invalid: some proxies may maintain a cached representation of a
      resource to indicate an error condition.  This is helpful when a
      proxy receives a request for a sleeping node and returns 202, then
      after the check-in discovers the origin server returns 404 for the
      resource.  In this case the proxy SHOULD temporarily cache an
      error return so that the client's next poll will receive a 404
      instead of another 202.

5.6.  Caching non-GET Methods

   In most circumstances, clients make GET requests to retrieve
   representations of resources.  In this case, proxies are caching the
   response which contains that resource representation.  However
   clients may also perform POST, PUT, or DELETE requests.  In the case
   where the origin server is a powered node, these requests SHOULD
   always be immediately forwarded to the origin server.

   However in the case of sleeping nodes, the proxy MUST cache the
   request itself until the node wakes up and checks-in.  Without this
   functionality it would be impossible to perform these HTTP methods on
   sleeping nodes.  Non-GET methods to sleeping nodes MUST use a
   Transaction-Id to associate the request with a specified client IP
   address, port number, and transaction id.

   Let's consider a transaction for a resource POST on a sleeping node:

   1.  Client POSTs to origin server with a unique transaction id

   2.  Proxy transparently intercepts the request, caches it, and
       returns 202

   3.  Upon check-in the proxy forwards the request then caches the
       response




Frank                    Expires March 15, 2010                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft     Chopan - Compressed HTTP Over PANs     September 2009


   4.  Client waits for Retry-After, then resubmits POST request using
       same transaction id

   5.  Proxy transparently intercepts the request and returns cached
       response with the transaction id














































Frank                    Expires March 15, 2010                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft     Chopan - Compressed HTTP Over PANs     September 2009


6.  HTTP to Chopan Gateways

   Chopan leverages the HTTP standard in order to provide
   interoperability with the World Wide Web. Interoperability is
   achieved by using standard HTTP external to the PAN and using Chopan
   internal to the PAN.  Nodes which perform HTTP-Chopan translation are
   called Chopan gateways:

   o  Requests into the PAN are translated from HTTP to Chopan.

   o  Requests from inside the PAN to the external network are
      translated from Chopan to HTTP.

   o  Requests from inside the PAN to other nodes inside the PAN are
      Chopan end-to-end

   Diagram of gateway translations:

             <= External  |  PAN =>
   Client -> [HTTP] -> Gateway -> [Chopan] -> Server
   Server <- [HTTP] <- Gateway <- [Chopan] <- Client

   Gateway translations SHOULD be performed transparently.  Clients
   external the PAN assume they are communicating HTTP directly to the
   origin server.  Gateways intercept these HTTP requests and translate
   them into Chopan requests.  Likewise responses are translated from
   Chopan back to HTTP.

   Because Chopan recommends that translation happens transparently,
   this means that the gateway must be sniffing incoming packets for
   TCP/HTTP requests.  This design has all the same issues as detailed
   in Interception Proxy Caching.  It is expected that in most
   implementations the gateway will also perform interception caching,
   although this specification does not require it.

   HTTP to Chopan is referred to as compression, and Chopan to HTTP is
   referred to as decompression.  During the compression process the
   text format of requests and responses is encoded into Chopan's binary
   message format.  Each HTTP header is examined and mapped into its
   binary encoding.  Depending on the quality of the PAN link layer, the
   compression process may strip out HTTP headers, according to these
   priorities:

   o  Content type and cache-control headers SHOULD never be stripped

   o  Standard headers with u2 value encodings or short strings SHOULD
      be maintained




Frank                    Expires March 15, 2010                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft     Chopan - Compressed HTTP Over PANs     September 2009


   o  Standard headers without u2 value encodings or with longer strings
      MAY be stripped

   o  Non-standard headers SHOULD be stripped (assuming typical PAN
      constraints)

   The Chopan compression and stripping of headers is a gateway to
   origin server matter.  This does not free the gateway from faithfully
   implementing the full HTTP specification and abiding by its
   conventions.  In the cases where HTTP headers or functionality is
   reduced to meet Chopan constraints, the gateway should compensate so
   that the client's perspective is communication with a fully compliant
   HTTP origin server.






































Frank                    Expires March 15, 2010                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft     Chopan - Compressed HTTP Over PANs     September 2009


7.  Security

   Ideally Internet protocols implement an end-to-end security model
   between the two endpoint nodes.  However it is difficult to implement
   end-to-end session based security with unreliable packet protocols
   and sleeping nodes.  Rather Chopan, recommends that the security
   strategy is divided between internal and external PAN nodes.

   Internally all PAN nodes should be fully trusted using link layer
   security such as the AES encryption specified by 802.15.4.

   External to the PAN, the gateway should utilize full TCP/HTTP to
   enable the well known security mechanisms associated with those
   protocols.  This includes TLS/HTTPS and the various HTTP
   authentication mechanisms.

   NOTE: A lot more to think about here...


































Frank                    Expires March 15, 2010                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft     Chopan - Compressed HTTP Over PANs     September 2009


8.  Normative References

   [RFC0768]  Postel, J., "User Datagram Protocol", RFC 768,
              August 1980.

   [RFC0793]  Postel, J., "Transmission Control Protocol", RFC 793,
              September 1981.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2279]  Yergeau, F., "UTF-8, a transformation format of ISO
              10646", RFC 2279, January 1998.

   [RFC2616]  Fielding, R., "Hypertext Transfer Protocol -- HTTP/1.1",
              RFC 2616, June 1999.

   [RFC4944]  Montenegro, G., "Transmission of IPv6 Packets over IEEE
              802.15.4 Networks", RFC 4944, September 2007.
































Frank                    Expires March 15, 2010                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft     Chopan - Compressed HTTP Over PANs     September 2009


Author's Address

   Brian Frank
   Tridium, Inc
   Richmond, VA
   US

   Email: brian.tridium@gmail.com











































Frank                    Expires March 15, 2010                [Page 24]

