


TSVWG                                                          G. Lavers
Internet-Draft                                                     Cisco
Intended status: Informational                            K. Webb Bailey
Expires: September 23, 2010                                  Wells Fargo
                                                          March 22, 2010


                   RSVP Usage in Enterprise Networks
                     draft-lavers-rsvp-usage-00.txt

Abstract

   This document presents a number of resource control requirements that
   enterprise network administrators face.  It also discusses how RSVP
   is being used, or considered, in order to address these requirements.

   This document is offered as input to the IETF 77 RSVP mini-BOF.  The
   authors recommend that the IETF continues supporting RSVP as a
   Standards Track protocol and continue facilitating development of
   necessary RSVP extensions in the Standards Track.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 23, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.



Lavers & Webb Bailey   Expires September 23, 2010               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            RSVP Enterprise Usage               March 2010


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.






























Lavers & Webb Bailey   Expires September 23, 2010               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            RSVP Enterprise Usage               March 2010


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Resource Control Requirements and RSVP Usage . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.1.  Growth in Rich Media Applications  . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.2.  Over-Provisioning not always possible  . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.3.  Complex WAN/MAN topology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.4.  Policy-based Resource Allocation . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.5.  Dynamic Rate Adjustment of Real-Time applications  . . . .  7
   3.  Recommendation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     6.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     6.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14



































Lavers & Webb Bailey   Expires September 23, 2010               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            RSVP Enterprise Usage               March 2010


1.  Introduction

   Guaranteed QoS for some applications with tight QoS requirements may
   be achieved by reserving resources in each node on the end-to-end
   path.  The main IETF protocol for these resource reservations is
   RSVP, specified in [RFC2205].  The authors of the present document
   recommend that the IETF continues supporting RSVP as a Standards
   Track protocol and continue facilitating development of the necessary
   RSVP extensions in the Standards Track.










































Lavers & Webb Bailey   Expires September 23, 2010               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            RSVP Enterprise Usage               March 2010


2.  Resource Control Requirements and RSVP Usage

   The growth of rich media applications and the evolution of the
   enterprise networks have placed challenging demands in the area of
   resource control.  These challenges and the rationale of why RSVP
   serves these scenarios well are explained in this section.

2.1.  Growth in Rich Media Applications

   There is an increasing use of mixed multi-media (voice, video, and
   data) applications and systems being deployed within the Enterprise.
   In addition, high quality video conferencing is becoming more
   prevalent in todayis enterprises.  While it is clear that the current
   use of DiffServ based QoS is necessary, it is not sufficient in
   addressing the full support of this demands of todayis multi-media
   traffic.  In particular, the voice and video traffic is generally
   provisioned in priority or other fixed-bandwidth queues.  These
   queues require an admission control mechanism without which any
   oversubscription would result in packets being randomly dropped from
   any of the sessions/streams traversing the DiffServ queues.  This
   would lower the quality of the very traffic that we were trying to
   protect and impact user experience.

   RSVP, as defined in [RFC2205], is an on-path explicit signaling
   resource reservation mechanism.  This mechanism not only allows
   admission control based on bandwidth to occur in each of the RSVP-
   enabled hops along the path but it also supports application or user
   based admission control.  This is described in [RFC2208].  RSVP in an
   IntServ architecture also ensures that Resource Reservation mechanism
   is in sync with the QoS applied along the same hop.  Thus it
   addresses the need for the growing rich media application in the
   enterprise.

2.2.  Over-Provisioning not always possible

   While Over-Provisioning may sound theoretically possible, in practice
   it is very difficult to rely on over-provisioning everywhere in the
   network 100% of the time (i.e. during all possible failure scenarios)
   for the following reasons:

   o  It is also not possible to over-provision the Enterprise WAN
      network to match the peak voice and video requirement as the usage
      of rich media applications is not only growing in almost all
      enterprises but is doing so in an unpredictable manner.  Hence, a
      constant adjustment in the network to overprovision is necessary
      but impractical to do so.





Lavers & Webb Bailey   Expires September 23, 2010               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            RSVP Enterprise Usage               March 2010


   o  The cost of over provisioning some links (eg transcontinental) is
      prohibitively high and preclude sheer over provisioning.

   o  There is economical pressure to do right-provisioning and not
      over-provisioning.

   o  The Enterprise WAN network core connectivity is built with
      arbitrary meshing and where the corresponding Diffserv classes
      cannot simply be assumed to be always over-provisioned compared to
      the peak load of voice and video.

   If an enterprise cannot rely on the provisioned capacity to meet all
   their needs then there is a need for an admission control system such
   that the enterprises can handle the over-subscription in a non-
   arbitrary and a proactive manner.  When sufficient capacity is not
   available, RSVP explicitly notifies the application and this allows
   the application to handle the reservation failure in many ways
   including re-routing the traffic through other means, prioritizing
   some traffic over others and issuing a busy tone.

2.3.  Complex WAN/MAN topology

   Due to the complex WAN/MAN topology and the fact that there may be
   Multiple call/session management systems in use, it is difficult to
   depend on a static or off-path bandwidth-counting QoS mechanism.
   These mechanisms do not respond well to real-time network events and
   do not always maintain an accurate representation of the multimedia
   traffic flows originating from multiple systems.

   Enterprise branches sometimes have dual WAN uplinks and where the
   secondary link cannot be over-provisioned.  This scenario is
   challenging to a static or an off-path QoS solution.

   RSVP serves well in this scenario as each of the links can be RSVP
   enabled and the admission control will take into account the capacity
   of the link and the current traffic demands prior to guaranteeing the
   bandwidth for any request.  Thus, complex WAN/MAN topology and/or
   multiple call systems can be deployed in any enterprise without the
   above mentioned concerns.

2.4.  Policy-based Resource Allocation

   Enterprise resources cannot always be over-provisioned to satisfy
   unbounded demand and so resources need to proportioned in accordance
   to business need.  For example, allocate fractions of the link in
   terms of bandwidth to be used by specific applications, application-
   types or user-classes.  This gives rise to a requirement that the
   resource control system should be able to match resources to business



Lavers & Webb Bailey   Expires September 23, 2010               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            RSVP Enterprise Usage               March 2010


   need in a dynamic and a scalable fashion.

   [RFC2872] and [RFC3181] allow policy elements to accompany
   reservation requests to enable the reservation process to take into
   account business need.  Priority can be attached to reservations
   based on user, user groups, role or other attributes.

   This allows Enterprises to handle unbounded demand nicely.

2.5.  Dynamic Rate Adjustment of Real-Time applications

   As discussed in [I-D.lefaucheur-tsvwg-rsvp-multiple-preemption] and
   [I-D.polk-tsvwg-intserv-multiple-tspec]:

   "Today, real-time applications and endpoints have evolved such that
   they are very often capable of transmitting at different bandwidth
   rates.  This is achieved by various techniques including the use of
   layered coding (and transmission of only a subset of these layers) or
   by reducing frame rates, resolution or quality at a given resolution.
   Endpoints also often have the ability to adjust their transmission
   rate dynamically mid-session with little or no artifact.

   Typically, a higher bandwidth allows to achieve higher quality of
   experience so that it is desirable to take advantage of higher
   bandwidth when available.  However, when only lower bandwidth is
   available, it is desirable that the endpoints adjust their
   transmission rate accordingly, to avoid generating excess traffic
   that is likely to create congestion that will affect even the base
   quality layer of that session as well as the quality of other
   sessions sharing the same network resources.

   When resource reservation is not supported by the network, endpoints
   may be able to achieve such dynamic rate adjustment in a reactive
   manner based on congestion detection.  For example,
   [I-D.westerlund-avt-ecn-for-rtp] discusses how explicit congestion
   notification (ECN) ([RFC3168]) can be used to that effect for RTP
   ([RFC3550]) flows running over UDP/IP that use RTCP () as feedback
   mechanism.

   When resource reservation is supported by the network (e.g.  Using
   RSVP), endpoints can take advantage of it to achieve efficient
   dynamic encoding/bandwidth adjustment.  This can be seen as a pro-
   active approach to dynamic rate adjustment because the network
   facilitates continuous apportionment (and re-apportionment) of
   resources across competing flows before any congestion occurs."

   Extensions such as proposed in
   [I-D.lefaucheur-tsvwg-rsvp-multiple-preemption] and



Lavers & Webb Bailey   Expires September 23, 2010               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            RSVP Enterprise Usage               March 2010


   [I-D.polk-tsvwg-intserv-multiple-tspec] are necessary to support the
   evolution of applications.

   RSVP is based on explicit on-path signaling and therefore it allows
   upstream systems and applications to take corrective action, such as
   routing the session/stream across a different transport, reducing the
   bandwidth requirement of the session, or allowing the session to
   traverse the transport as Best-Effort traffic.











































Lavers & Webb Bailey   Expires September 23, 2010               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            RSVP Enterprise Usage               March 2010


3.  Recommendation

   Today's enterprises have to address some of the above scenarios and
   because RSVP is well poised to address the same as the main IETF
   protocol for on-path resource reservation, the authors of the present
   document recommend that the IETF continues supporting RSVP as a
   Standards Track protocol and continue facilitating development of the
   necessary RSVP extensions in the Standards Track.  This will ensure
   that on-path resource control solutions can be specified and deployed
   in enterprise networks with the benefits of the full IETF technical
   expertise and with the benefits of multi- vendor interoperability.








































Lavers & Webb Bailey   Expires September 23, 2010               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            RSVP Enterprise Usage               March 2010


4.  Security Considerations

   Not discussed in this version of teh document.
















































Lavers & Webb Bailey   Expires September 23, 2010              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            RSVP Enterprise Usage               March 2010


5.  IANA Considerations

   None.
















































Lavers & Webb Bailey   Expires September 23, 2010              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            RSVP Enterprise Usage               March 2010


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2205]  Braden, B., Zhang, L., Berson, S., Herzog, S., and S.
              Jamin, "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) -- Version 1
              Functional Specification", RFC 2205, September 1997.

   [RFC2208]  Mankin, A., Baker, F., Braden, B., Bradner, S., O'Dell,
              M., Romanow, A., Weinrib, A., and L. Zhang, "Resource
              ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP) Version 1 Applicability
              Statement Some Guidelines on Deployment", RFC 2208,
              September 1997.

   [RFC2872]  Bernet, Y. and R. Pabbati, "Application and Sub
              Application Identity Policy Element for Use with RSVP",
              RFC 2872, June 2000.

   [RFC3181]  Herzog, S., "Signaled Preemption Priority Policy Element",
              RFC 3181, October 2001.

6.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.lefaucheur-tsvwg-rsvp-multiple-preemption]
              Faucheur, F., Kudur, A., and A. Narayanan, "Multiple
              Preemption Priority Policy Element for RSVP",
              draft-lefaucheur-tsvwg-rsvp-multiple-preemption-01 (work
              in progress), October 2009.

   [I-D.polk-tsvwg-intserv-multiple-tspec]
              Polk, J. and S. Dhesikan, "Integrated Services (IntServ)
              Extension to Allow Signaling of Multiple Traffic
              Specifications and Multiple Flow Specifications in
              RSVPv1", draft-polk-tsvwg-intserv-multiple-tspec-03 (work
              in progress), March 2010.

   [I-D.westerlund-avt-ecn-for-rtp]
              Westerlund, M., Johansson, I., Perkins, C., and K.
              Carlberg, "Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) for RTP
              over UDP", draft-westerlund-avt-ecn-for-rtp-02 (work in
              progress), October 2009.

   [RFC3168]  Ramakrishnan, K., Floyd, S., and D. Black, "The Addition
              of Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) to IP",
              RFC 3168, September 2001.

   [RFC3550]  Schulzrinne, H., Casner, S., Frederick, R., and V.
              Jacobson, "RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time



Lavers & Webb Bailey   Expires September 23, 2010              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft            RSVP Enterprise Usage               March 2010


              Applications", STD 64, RFC 3550, July 2003.


















































Lavers & Webb Bailey   Expires September 23, 2010              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft            RSVP Enterprise Usage               March 2010


Authors' Addresses

   Glen Lavers
   Cisco Systems
   5400 Meadows Road
   LAKE OSWEGO  OREGON 97035
   USA

   Phone:
   Email: glavers@cisco.com


   Karen Webb Bailey
   Wells Fargo
   1525 W WT Harris
   Charlotte  NC 28262
   USA

   Phone:
   Email: karen.bailey3@wellsfargo.com































Lavers & Webb Bailey   Expires September 23, 2010              [Page 14]


