


Network Working Group                                           K. Moore
Internet-Draft                                          Network Heretics
Intended status: Informational                              July 5, 2011
Expires: January 6, 2012


          Reclassification of 6to4 as an Experimental Protocol
                    draft-moore-6to4-experimental-00

Abstract

   This memo explains why the 6to4 specifications are being reclassified
   as Experimental protocols.  It also makes recommendations for
   limiting the scope of continued use of 6to4 for those wishing to use
   it.  These recommendations are being made in light of decreasing
   applicability of 6to4 and of operational problems associated with its
   use.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 6, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as



Moore                    Expires January 6, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            6to4 to Experimental                 July 2011


   described in the Simplified BSD License.


















































Moore                    Expires January 6, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            6to4 to Experimental                 July 2011


1.  NOTE IN DRAFT

   This document was written to accompany a proposal, submitted to IESG,
   to reclassify the 6to4 RFCs as Experimental.  While IETF procedures
   do not require an RFC to be published when reclassifying an existing
   RFC, this has often been done in the past in order to provide a
   visible explanation for the reasons for the reclassification and/or
   to provide increased visibility for the reclassification.  While the
   reclassification of 6to4 is a standards action, the intended status
   of this document is Informational, or perhaps BCP.  (Recommendations
   to discourage accidental use of 6to4 are presumed to have more weight
   if classified as BCP, and it's the author's understanding that some
   members of the community wish to have IETF produce weighty
   recommendations to that effect.)

   The decision to reclassify 6to4 as Experimental, and the decision to
   approve this document for publication, should be treated as separate
   decisions by the IETF, since endorsement of the decision to
   reclassify should not automatically be taken as an endorsement of
   this document.  However it makes no sense to publish this document if
   the standards action is not approved.

   The author's intention in writing this document is to provide a
   noncontroversial public justification for removing 6to4 from the
   standards track, while still leaving open the possibility for
   experience with 6to4 to inform the design of a better general-purpose
   means of allowing IPv6 to be accessed from IPv4 networks.

   This document is not a work item of any IETF working group.  Comments
   on this draft should be sent to the author.





















Moore                    Expires January 6, 2012                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            6to4 to Experimental                 July 2011


2.  Introduction

   This memo explains why the 6to4 specifications ([RFC3056], [RFC3068])
   are being reclassified as Experimental protocols.

   6to4 was intended to be a general-purpose means by which small
   networks or individual hosts with only IPv4 access could exchange
   IPv6 traffic with each other, and with hosts on the public IPv6
   Internet.  However, 6to4 relies on direct access to the public
   Internet, using public address space, for two reasons: (1) it derives
   an IPv6 prefix from the public IPv4 address; and (2) it uses IP
   protocol 41, which is not compatible with most NATs.

   The already common and increasing use of NAT following the
   introduction of 6to4 has always meant that 6to4 had less
   applicability than was hoped for, but until now most uses of those
   NATs have been in enterprise networks which could implement 6to4 at
   their borders if they chose.  The recent exhaustion of IPv4 address
   space means that Internet service providers must increasingly impose
   NAT between their customers and the public Internet, or at least,
   that public IPv4 addresses will become harder to come by and more
   expensive.  The already-narrow applicability of 6to4 can thus be
   expected to narrow considerably in the near future.

   Worse, the widespread use of RFC 1918 [RFC1918] address blocks in
   private networks means that ISPs often cannot assign such addresses
   to their customers without conflicting with their customers' existing
   use of those addresses.  Many 6to4 implementations do not enable 6to4
   for any interface that has an RFC 1918 address, but such
   implementations have no way of knowing if they were assigned an
   address from public IPv4 space, that is not actually routed to from
   the public Internet.  All attempts to use 6to4 in such circumstances
   will fail silently.

   Several operational problems have been associated with 6to4, which
   have caused an increased support burden for Internet service
   providers, network operators, and other support personnel.  In
   practice, 6to4 has not been sufficiently reliable to be a general-
   purpose means of providing IPv6 service to hosts with only IPv4
   connectivity; and performance sometimes been significantly worse than
   IPv4, particularly when exchanging traffic between "native" IPv6 and
   6to4 addresses.  Content providers have also complained about host
   implementations that choose 6to4 addresses over native IPv4
   addresses, per the recommendations in [RFC3484], resulting in worse
   reliability and/or diminished performance.  A more detailed
   discussion of these problems, along with recommendations for
   addressing some of them, is in [draft-ietf-v6ops-6to4-advisory].
   (Note that there is work in progress to update the address selection



Moore                    Expires January 6, 2012                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            6to4 to Experimental                 July 2011


   recommendations [draft-ietf-6man-rfc3484-revise], and some
   implementations already prefer native IPv4 over 6to4.)

   It appears possible to improve the reliability of 6to4 somewhat, for
   the benefit of hosts and networks for which it remains useful.
   However, the narrowing applicability of 6to4 implies that there is
   clearly a point of diminishing returns.  Due to the nature of routing
   between 6to4 and native IPv6, there is often little that a service
   provider can do to improve its customer's 6to4 service.  Internet
   service providers with IPv6 implementations underway, are
   understandably more interested in investing in efforts to deploy
   native IPv6, than in supporting an unreliable transition mechanism
   with inherently narrowing applicability.

   For these reasons, it is clear that 6to4 no longer meets the
   requirements of the Proposed Standard classification as defined in
   RFC 2026.  Nor does it appear to be possible to remedy these problems
   without changes that would make the result incompatible with existing
   6to4 implementations.  The Experimental classification is appropriate
   for a limited-use protocol that provides the opportunity for research
   or development.






























Moore                    Expires January 6, 2012                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            6to4 to Experimental                 July 2011


3.  Recommendations For Continued Use Of 6to4

   o  It is strongly recommended that all host and router
      implementations which support 6to4, disable it by default, and
      require explicit action to enable it

   o  New host and router implementations may implement support for
      6to4, but vendors should take into account the decreasing
      applicability of 6to4 along with support issues, and make
      decisions accordingly.

   o  For a host implementing "host 6to4", or a router implementing 6to4
      for the purpose of providing v6 service to an IPv4-only enterprise
      network: The host or router must have direct access to the public
      IPv4 internet, using public IPv4 address space that is exclusively
      delegated to and routed to that host or router, with the ability
      to exchange unfiltered IPv4 packets with protocol 41 with other
      host or routers on the public IPv4 Internet.

   o  For a relay router routing 6to4 traffic between the public IPv6
      Internet and the public IPv4 Internet: The router must not be
      configured to advertise connectivity to either 2002::/16 or
      192.88.99.0/24 without:

      A.  being able to route all traffic with destinations within
          2002::/16 or native IPv6 (respectively) consistent with that
          advertisement, to all hosts affected by the route
          advertisement (subject to normal filtering of bogus packets);

      B.  being adequately provisioned to handle all of the reasonably
          expected traffic generated by the hosts affected by that route
          advertisement;

      C.  being monitored to ensure continued reachability to the
          entirety of the advertised network(s) (modulo occasional
          distant network outages); and

      D.  immediately ceasing such advertisement when such connectivity
          is interrupted, until such time as it is restored.

   o  Any host using both 6to4 addresses and native IPv4, regardless of
      whether it supports 6to4 directly, should prefer IPv4 over 6to4
      destination addresses when both are advertised for the same
      destination, unless the application explicitly selects the 6to4
      destination, or the application explicitly selects IPv6 and 6to4
      is the best IPv6 address available for that destination.





Moore                    Expires January 6, 2012                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            6to4 to Experimental                 July 2011


   o  Any host with both a 6to4 address and a native, public IPv6
      address, regardless of whether it supports 6to4 directly, should
      prefer native IPv6 destination addresses over 6to4 destination
      addresses.

   o  Techniques similar to those described in
      [draft-ietf-v6ops-happy-eyeballs] may be appropriate for some
      applications (including applications other than HTTP) when
      presented with the ability to send traffic over multiple network
      interfaces, including cases when one or more of those interfaces
      is assigned a 6to4 address.  This will minimize the delay in
      recovery or fault detection when an attempt to use a 6to4 address
      fails.

   o  Any critical application (e.g. enterprise application) deployment
      using 6to4 should use explicitly provisioned relay routers to
      provide any required connectivity between 6to4 addresses and
      native IPv6 addresses.

   o  It is also recommended that host and router implementations make
      clear to their users, in a method appropriate to the
      implementation (e.g. user interface, documentation, notices to
      customers), that 6to4 is only applicable and likely to work well
      under fairly narrow conditions, such as those described above.



























Moore                    Expires January 6, 2012                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            6to4 to Experimental                 July 2011


4.  6to4 as an Experiment

   It is believed that experience with the use of 6to4 can provide
   useful insight into the design and operation of new network
   protocols, including potentially:

   o  better mechanisms to allow hosts on IPv4 networks to exchange
      traffic with the public IPv6 Internet;

   o  a better understanding of the limitations and hazards associated
      with using anycast addresses to advertise services in the public
      Internet, particularly when those services are provided by
      multiple parties;

   o  sudden, widespread deployment and use of new types of services in
      the public Internet, when those services have significantly
      different communications patterns than existing services, and
      especially when those services are used without users and network
      administrators being explicitly made aware of their use and the
      consequences thereof,

   o  design of network services in such a way that error conditions are
      detectable and/or correctable by those who are most affected by
      such errors, and who presumably have the most incentive to fix
      them.

   Measurement of existing and future use of 6to4 with the intent of
   gaining a greater understanding of any result of such use, is
   encouraged.






















Moore                    Expires January 6, 2012                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            6to4 to Experimental                 July 2011


5.  Security Considerations

   It appears that this memo introduces no new security vulnerabilities.
















































Moore                    Expires January 6, 2012                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            6to4 to Experimental                 July 2011


6.  References

   [RFC3056]  Carpenter, B. and K. Moore, "Connection of IPv6 Domains
              via IPv4 Clouds", RFC 3056, February 2001.

   [RFC3068]  Huitema, C., "An Anycast Prefix for 6to4 Relay Routers",
              RFC 3068, June 2001.

   [RFC1918]  Rekhter, Y., Moskowitz, R., Karrenberg, D., Groot, G., and
              E. Lear, "Address Allocation for Private Internets",
              BCP 5, RFC 1918, February 1996.

   [RFC3484]  Draves, R., "Default Address Selection for Internet
              Protocol version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 3484, February 2003.





































Moore                    Expires January 6, 2012               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            6to4 to Experimental                 July 2011


Author's Address

   Keith Moore
   Network Heretics

   Email: moore@network-heretics.com













































Moore                    Expires January 6, 2012               [Page 11]

