A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3461

        Title:      Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP) Service
                    Extension for Delivery Status Notifications (DSNs)
        Author(s):  K. Moore
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       January 2003
        Mailbox:    moore@cs.utk.edu
        Pages:      38
        Characters: 76076
        Obsoletes:  1891

        I-D Tag:    draft-moore-rfc1891bis-02.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3461.txt


This memo defines an extension to the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol
(SMTP) service, which allows an SMTP client to specify (a) that
Delivery Status Notifications (DSNs) should be generated under certain
conditions, (b) whether such notifications should return the contents
of the message, and (c) additional information, to be returned with a
DSN, that allows the sender to identify both the recipient(s) for
which the DSN was issued, and the transaction in which the original
message was sent.

This is now a Draft Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
