


Network Working Group                                S. Randriamasy, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                  Alcatel-Lucent Bell Labs
Intended status: Experimental                           October 15, 2010
Expires: April 18, 2011


                 Provider Confidential ALTO with Relays
                    draft-randriamasy-alto-relay-00

Abstract

   IETF is designing a new service called ALTO (Application Layer
   traffic Optimization) that includes a "Network Map Service" and an
   "Endpoint Ranking Service" and thus incentives for application
   clients to connect to ISP preferred Endpoints.  These services
   provide a view of the Network Provider (NP) topology to overlay
   clients.  However, NPs remain reluctant to implement the ALTO
   protocol for security reasons.  In particular, they do not want to
   unveil their topology to third parties and make them vulnerable to
   misuse.

   This document proposes a scheme to preserve Network Provider
   confidentiality while allowing the use of ALTO information for
   applications.  It introduces an "ALTO Relay" that gets the provider
   confidential ALTO response and hands it to a functional entity called
   a Connection Relay.  Meanwhile the ALTO Client gets a status and
   directions to connect to Connection Relay, that then will hand the
   desired application data.  The benefit for Application Clients
   accepting ALTO transactions involving ALTO Relays is a better quality
   of experience.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months



Randriamasy              Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   Provider Confidential ALTO with Relays     October 2010


   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 18, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.































Randriamasy              Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   Provider Confidential ALTO with Relays     October 2010


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Scope  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Provider Confidential ALTO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.1.  Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.2.  Provider Confidential ALTO architecture  . . . . . . . . .  7
       4.2.1.  Architecture Framework . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       4.2.2.  Current Transaction framework  . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.3.  Use cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.4.  ALTO requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       4.4.1.  ALTO Relays and Connection Relays  . . . . . . . . . . 10
       4.4.2.  PC ALTO discovery processes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.5.  ALTO protocol description updates  . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       4.5.1.  Need for a PC Service Property . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       4.5.2.  ALTO messages  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  Other optional Connection Relay Services . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13


























Randriamasy              Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   Provider Confidential ALTO with Relays     October 2010


1.  Introduction

   IETF is designing a new service called ALTO that provides guidance to
   P2P applications, which have to select one or several hosts from a
   set of candidates that are able to provide a desired resource.  This
   guidance shall be based on parameters that affect performance and
   efficiency of the data transmission between the hosts, e.g., the
   topological distance.  The ultimate goal is to improve Quality of
   Experience (QoE) in the application while reducing resource
   consumption in the underlying network infrastructure.  The ALTO
   protocol conveys the Internet View from the perspective of a Network
   Provider network region that spans from a region of an Autonomous
   System (AS) to several ASes.  Together with this Network Map, it
   provides the Network Provider determined Cost Map between locations
   of the Network Map. Last, it provides the NP oriented Ranking of
   Endpoints w.r.t. their routing cost.  Thus a client smartly placing
   its requests can infer the whole Provider Network topology.  Network
   Providers (NP) in this document include both ISPs, who provide means
   to transport the data and Content Delivery Network (CDN) who care for
   the dissemination, persistent storage and possibly identification of
   the best/closest content copy.

   For security reasons however, Network Providers for either transport
   or delivery of content, are reluctant to provide their network
   topology to third parties that may misuse it.  Indeed, the current
   ALTO protocol draft, see , [ID-alto-protocol5] , includes a section
   11 on "Security Considerations" where section 11.1 "Privacy
   Considerations for ISPs" mentions the layer confidentiality issue
   that needs to be solved before ISPs adopt the ALTO protocol.

   This document proposes to address this issue by introducing a
   transaction mode qualified as "Provider Confidential" (PC).  A PC
   ALTO transaction involves one or several additional entities that are
   called an ALTO Relay.  An ALTO Relay gets the ALTO Responses issued
   by an ALTO Server in place of the Application Client.  The ALTO
   Client itself just gets a status indicating success or failure of the
   transaction.  In case of success, the Application Client connects to
   an entity called a Connection Relay (CR), that is linked to an ALTO
   Relay and that is mapped to the network region hosting this
   Application Client.  The Application Client, meanwhile specifies how
   the select and connect to the candidate Endpoints given their ranking
   or cost.  It sends this "connection policy" to the Connection Relay,
   that must enforce it with the ranking or cost received from the ALTO
   Server.  The CR then communicates with the Application Client who
   thus knows nothing about the ALTO selected Endpoints.  The applicable
   ALTO Services are Network Map Services, in particular, the Cost
   Service and the Endpoint Ranking Service.




Randriamasy              Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   Provider Confidential ALTO with Relays     October 2010


   This way, users of an ISP that supports Provider Confidential ALTO
   Services get a better QoE while the ISP saves its resources.

   An Application Client MAY refuse to use Provider Confidential ALTO
   Services.  In that case, one option is that the client gets no ALTO
   service at all, and thus a worse QoE with risks to have its
   connection throttled.


2.  Scope

   It is assumed that Applications likely to use the ALTO service have a
   choice in connection endpoints as it is the case for most of them.

   This draft generalizes the term P2P Client to Application Client.
   Application Clients include the case of CDN Clients and of any
   Application Client having the choice in several connection points for
   data or resource exchange, such as GRID Application Clients, Gaming
   Application Clients and a limited number of P2P Clients.

   The term P2P Clients is used only in the figures, to better
   illustrate the difference of the present proposal with the current
   ALTO protocol draft.  This draft focuses on the use case where: the
   ALTO Client is embedded in the Application Client , only one ALTO
   Relay and one Connection Relay is involved in a PC ALTO Transaction,
   and the ALTO Relay is embedded in the Connection Relay


3.  Terminology

   Endpoint: can be a content location in a P2P or Content Delivery
   Network or a resource location e.g. for GRID applications.

   Network Provider: can be an ISP who provides means to transport the
   data or a Content Delivery Network (CDN) provider who cares for the
   dissemination, persistent storage and possibly identification of the
   best/closest content copy.

   Application Client (AC): a Client having the choice in several
   connection points for data or resource exchange: currently, a CDN
   client, a Client of a GRID application, a Client of a small P2P
   network.

   ALTO Relay: a functional entity that is mapped to the Application
   Client (AC) w.r.t. the region hosting this Application Client, by an
   ALTO discovery process driven by the Network Provider.  It receives
   the ALTO responses in place of the requesting AC.  The ALTO Relay
   discovery process still needs to be specified.



Randriamasy              Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   Provider Confidential ALTO with Relays     October 2010


   Connection relay: this networking entity is linked to or hosts an
   ALTO Relay and is connected with both the Selected Endpoints and the
   Application Client.  It is a transit point between an AC and the
   Selected Endpoints so that the AC ignores the ID and location of the
   Selected EPs.

   Provider Confidential (PC) ALTO Service: this service uses ALTO
   Relays and Connection Relays to keep the Provider Network information
   ignored by the ACs while providing ALTO Services.


4.  Provider Confidential ALTO

4.1.  Overview

   To prevent Provider Confidential (PC) information from being unveiled
   to Application Clients, this draft proposes an indirection of the
   information provided by an ALTO Server to an intermediate ALTO
   Functional Entity that is linked with a Networking Entity taking care
   of the transport of the data between the Application Client and the
   selected Endpoint(s).  The intermediate Functional Entity is called
   ALTO Relay and the connecting Networking entity a Connection Relay.
   These two entities are managed by the Network Provider.  PC ALTO can
   directly apply to the ALTO protocol services reporting on EP cost and
   related to Map filtering, that MAY be supported by an ALTO server.
   However both the Application Client and Network Provider would take
   advantage of extending the "Provider Confidential" mention to the Map
   Services, that an ALTO server MUST support while ensuring that the
   client gets an accordingly improved transport service.

   Figure 1 shows an example scenario provided in the last IETF ALTO
   protocol draft, see [ID-alto-protocol5], Section 8.3, where the ALTO
   client is embedded in the P2P Client and requires an ALTO server
   servicing its own ISP to provide the Endpoint Cost for a list of
   gathered peers.

   The use case proceeds as follows:

   1.  The P2P Client discovers peers from sources such as Peer Exchange
       (PEX) from other P2P Clients, Distributed Hash Tables (DHT), and
       P2P Trackers.

   2.  The P2P Client queries the ALTO Server's Ranking Service,
       including discovered peers as the set of Destination Endpoints,
       and indicates the 'ordinal' Cost Mode.  The response indicates
       the ranking of the candidate peers.





Randriamasy              Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   Provider Confidential ALTO with Relays     October 2010


   3.  The P2P Client connects to the peers in the order specified in
       the ranking.


      .---------.                          .---------------.
      |         |   (2) Get Path Ranking   |               |
      |  ALTO   | <----------------------> | [ALTO Client] |
      | Server  |                          |               |
      |         |                          |  P2P Client   |    .---------.
      `---------'                          `---------------' <- |  P2P    |
                .---------.                 /  |      ^    ^    | Tracker |
                | Peer 1  | <--------------    |      |     \   `---------'
                `---------'                    |    (1) Gather Peers
                    .      (3) Connect to      |      |       \
                    .        Selected Peers   /   .--------.  .--------.
                .---------.                  /    |  P2P   |  |  DHT   |
                | Peer 50 | <----------------     | Client |  `--------'
                `---------'                       | (PEX)  |
                                                  `--------'


   Figure 1:  Current ALTO protocol scenario for an ALTO Client
   collocated with the P2P Client and querying the ALTO server Ranking Service.

4.2.  Provider Confidential ALTO architecture

4.2.1.  Architecture Framework

   The Provider Confidential Services mentionned in this draft apply
   whether the ALTO Client is co-located with the Application Client or
   with the Application Endpoint tracker.

   Several kinds of mapping and discovery processes are needed to
   support PC ALTO.  Like the ALTO Server Discovery, they still need to
   be specified.  An AC can be serviced by one or several ALTO Servers.
   Likewise, an ALTO Relay can be embedded in a Connection Relay, or
   connected to several Connection Relays.  An AC itself can be
   connected to several Connection Relays associated to one ALTO Relay.
   Future work on PC ALTO needs to define:

   o  The association between an ALTO Server and the ALTO Relay
      receiving its responses.

   o  The association between an Application Client and one or more ALTO
      Connection Relays.

   o  The mapping between ALTO Relays and ALTO Connection Relays.




Randriamasy              Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   Provider Confidential ALTO with Relays     October 2010


   The mappings between the ALTO Server and ALTO Relay should be managed
   by the NP.

4.2.2.  Current Transaction framework

   For the moment the described PC ALTO transaction rely on the
   following hypotheses:

   1.  An ALTO Client named AOC1 is embedded in or connected to an
       Application Client.

   2.  AOC1 has discovered a reference ALTO server AOS(1), that is
       possibly communicating with other ALTO servers.

   3.  AOC1 has discovered the capabilities of AOS(1) and discovers and
       accepts that any requested Provider Network information is
       classified as PC.

   4.  AOS(1) is mapped to an ALTO Relay AOR(AOS(1)), by a relevant ALTO
       discovery process, managed by the Network Provider.

   5.  The information requested by AOC1 will be sent to the ALTO Relay
       AOR(AOS(1)).

   6.  AOC(1) will receive from AOS(1) responses indicating Provider
       Confidentiality and containing a status code indicating success
       or failure for its request.

       A.  If the association between an ALTO Client and an ALTO
           Connection Relay is managed by the Network Provider, then
           AOS(1) MUST send to AOC(1) the ID or the Address of the
           Connection Relay(s) it can associate with.

   7.  AOR(AOS(1)) is embedded in or connected to a Connection Relay
       that MUST connect to both the Application Client and to the
       Selected Endpoints.

4.3.  Use cases

   Figure 2 depicts the features and mechanisms added to the current
   ALTO scenario for Provider Confidential ALTO services, for the use
   case depicted in Figure 1.  The EPs have already been discovered.  In
   this figure, the term Peer is replaced by the term Endpoint, the term
   P2P Client by Application Client and a specific Tracker for resource
   sharing Application Endpoints should be added to the tools involved
   in step (1) of Figure 1.

   We focus on the ALTO use case where the ALTO Client is co-located



Randriamasy              Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   Provider Confidential ALTO with Relays     October 2010


   with an Application Client in a terminal node, as not all P2P systems
   use a P2P tracker for peer discovery and selection as written in
   [ID-alto-protocol5], section 8.2.  As in section 8.3 the Application
   Client queries the ALTO Server servicing its own ISP.  An ALTO Relay
   is mapped to the queried ALTO server.  This ALTO Relay is associated
   to one single ALTO Connection Relay and embedded in it.  The ALTO
   Client requests the ALTO Endpoint Ranking Service.


      .---------.                          .---------------.
      |         |   (2) Get Path Ranking   |               |
      |  ALTO   | <----------------------  | [ALTO Client] |
      | Server  | ---------------------->  |               |
      |         | (4) Send ALTO PC Status  |  P2P Client   |      .---------.
      `---------'  \  and address of       `---------------' <--- |  P2P    |
                    \ Connection Relay        |           ^ ^     | Tracker |
                     \                        |           |  \    `---------'
                      ---------------.        |           |   \
                                     |        |           |    \
               (3) Send Path Ranking |        |          (1) Gather Peers
                   to ALTO Relay     |  (5) Connect to    |      \
                                     |   Connection Relay |       \
                                     |   Send EP specs    |        \
                                     |        |           |         \
        .--------.                   v        v           |          \
        | Peer 1 |                 .------------.     .--------.  .--------.
        `--------' <-------------  |[ALTO Relay]|     |  P2P   |  |  DHT   |
            .      (6) Connect to  |            |     | Client |  `--------'
            .      Selected Peers  | Connection |     | (PEX)  |
        .--------. <-------------  |   Relay    |     `--------'
        | Peer 50|                 `------------'
        `--------'

   Figure 2: Provider Confidential ALTO transaction for an ALTO Client
   collocated with the Application Client and querying the ALTO server Ranking Service.
   The ALTO Relay is embedded in the Connection Relay.
   The EPs have already been discovered.

   The use case proceeds as follows:

   1.  The Application Client discovers peers from sources such as Peer
       Exchange (PEX) from other P2P Clients, Distributed Hash Tables
       (DHT), P2P Trackers or other Application Endpoints tracking
       processes.

   2.  The Application Client via its ALTO Client queries the ALTO
       Server's Ranking Service, including discovered peers as the set
       of Destination Endpoints, and indicates the 'ordinal' Cost Mode.



Randriamasy              Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft   Provider Confidential ALTO with Relays     October 2010


   3.  The ALTO Server sends the requested Path Ranking information to
       its associated ALTO Relay,

   4.  The ALTO Server responds to the Application Client with:

       A.  a status indicating: (i) failure or success and (ii) that the
           Provider Confidential ServiceType is activated,

       B.  the IP address of the Connection Relay to connect to,

       *  An option is that: if the Network Provider gives the
          Application Client the possibility to refuse the Provider
          Confidential ServiceType and if the AC does so, then it may
          get a lower priority service.

       *  The ALTO Server response to the ALTO Client:

       *

          +  Does not contain any EP address (or other Network
             Information) but MAY content other synthetic information
             such as the number of ranked EP locations.

          +  MUST indicate that the sending of the requested information
             to the ALTO Relay has been is completed.

   5.  The Application Client connects to the Connection Relay

   6.  The Connection Relay connects to the selected Endpoints.

       *  The Connection Relay is now a transit point between the ALTO
          Client and the selected application Endpoints.

4.4.  ALTO requirements

   This section lists the features and updates to the ALTO protocol
   draft that are needed to support PC ALTO transactions.

4.4.1.  ALTO Relays and Connection Relays

   These are the obvious additional ALTO architecture elements.  In this
   framework, the ALTO Relay is associated to the Control plane and the
   Connection Relay to the Data plane.  The current protocol draft
   [ID-alto-protocol5], , in Section 7.8.2 on "Service ID", stresses
   that "for scalability and fault tolerance, multiple ALTO Servers may
   deployed to serve equivalent ALTO information".  Likewise, the
   deployment and association of ALTO Relays and Connection Relays must
   allow scalability and fault tolerance, especially for large (w.r.t.



Randriamasy              Expires April 18, 2011                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft   Provider Confidential ALTO with Relays     October 2010


   the number of Peers) P2P networks.

4.4.2.  PC ALTO discovery processes

   An ALTO Relay discovery process is necessary to associate ALTO
   Servers and ALTO Relays.  Preferably, it just looks up the mapping
   between Servers and Relays, which is previously set by the Provider
   Network management and updated when necessary, typically when the
   Network Map changes, which is not frequent.  Likewise, whether the
   ALTO Connection Relay discovery is driven by the ALTO Server needs to
   be decided.

4.5.  ALTO protocol description updates

   This section proposes a list of updates to the current ALTO protocol
   draft that would support PC ALTO.

4.5.1.  Need for a PC Service Property

   ALTO services and related requests are currently classified w.r.t.
   their type, that is, the information they provide.  They should also
   be classified w.r.t. the way the Network Provider management
   processes the ALTO requests and the responses sent to the Application
   Client.  Typically, if a requested information is considered as
   Provider Confidential by a NP, the corresponding request should be
   classified so and this information sent to the ALTO Client.

   In Section 3 "Protocol Structure", a section on Service Properties
   should be added to present the purpose of Provider Confidential ALTO
   Services.

   Another section may detail how a PC attribute is defined.  For
   example, Section 7.7.1.2 "Server Capability" may introduce something
   like:

   enum { ServiceDistribution, ..., } ServiceProperty;

   enum { Provider Confidential, Public, Unauthorized, ... }
   ServiceDistribution;

4.5.2.  ALTO messages

   This section on PC specific ALTO messages is very schematic and will
   be further detailed as the work on PC ALTO Services progresses.







Randriamasy              Expires April 18, 2011                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft   Provider Confidential ALTO with Relays     October 2010


4.5.2.1.  ALTO Status Codes for PC Services

   When the "Provider Confidential" Service Distribution property is
   available and activated, the ALTO Status codes for the responses sent
   to an ALTO Client MUST include the case where a request has been
   successfully processed but the requested information redirected to
   the ALTO Relay because the invoked ALTO Service is PC.

   In [ID-alto-protocol5] , Section 7.4 "ALTO Status Codes" provides
   definitions in Table 1 "ALTO Status Codes".  A PC specific status
   code should be added.  It could be for instance: "ALTO Status code =
   7 (or whatever), HTTP Status code=204, Description = (Success) No
   Content".

4.5.2.2.  ALTO Requests

   The ALTO Client does not know in advance whther an ALTO Service is PC
   or not.  So the Request syntax remains the same as the one described
   in [ID-alto-protocol5], Section 7.7.5.1.1 "Request Syntax".

   request = POST, HTTP method and URI path

4.5.2.3.  Response Syntax for PC Services

   If the PC service distribution mode is activated, then the
   ServiceProperty attribute ServiceDistribution MUST be set to
   "Provider Confidential".

4.5.2.3.1.  ALTO Server response to ALTO Relay

   The ALTO Server response to an ALTO Relay contains the ALTO
   information requested by the ALTO Client.

4.5.2.3.2.  ALTO response to ALTO Client

   The response to the ALTO Client sent by ALTO Server contains: the
   ALTO Status, plus possible PC specific Response Meta Information plus
   the address or ID of the Connection Relay to connect to.


5.  Other optional Connection Relay Services

   A Connection Relay may host other services.  At the first place, it
   can act as a cache for the data traded by all the interconnected
   Application Clients.  This can significantly help saving time and
   resources both in transport and retrieval of information and
   resources.




Randriamasy              Expires April 18, 2011                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft   Provider Confidential ALTO with Relays     October 2010


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.


7.  Security Considerations

   The Application Client MUST have the guarantee to be connected to a
   Connection Relay that is safe, as the latter is managed by the NP and
   therefore must be protected from any spoofing.  However the client
   may want additional guarantees about the way the NP will process its
   requests for ALTO information.


8.  Acknowledgements


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

9.2.  Informative References

   [ID-alto-protocol5]
              ""ALTO Protocol" draft-ietf-alto-protocol-05.txt",
              July 2010.


Author's Address

   Sabine Randriamasy (editor)
   Alcatel-Lucent Bell Labs
   Route de Villejust
   NOZAY  91620
   FRANCE

   Email: Sabine.Randriamasy@alcatel-lucent.com








Randriamasy              Expires April 18, 2011                [Page 13]


