


Mobility Extensions for IPv6                                   W. Haddad
(Mext)                                                          Ericsson
Internet-Draft                                           August 18, 2010
Intended status: Standards Track
Expires: February 19, 2011


    Enhancing Mobile IPv6 Route Optimization Mode with Secure Social
                               Dimension
                      draft-haddad-mext-mobisoc-03

Abstract

   This memo describes an enhancement to Mobile IPv6 route optimization
   mode which is derived from introducing a social dimension within the
   home network.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 19, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Haddad                  Expires February 19, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         MIPv6 RO Mode Optimization            August 2010


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conventions used in this document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Motivation and Goal  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Protocol Description . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Dual Mobility With Different Home Networks . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  New Options, Bits and Messages Formats . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14






































Haddad                  Expires February 19, 2011               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         MIPv6 RO Mode Optimization            August 2010


1.  Introduction

   We suggest an enhancement to Mobile IPv6 protocol
   ([I-D.ietf-mext-rfc3775bis]) based on introducing a social dimension
   within the home network.  Consequently, our mechansim is currently
   limited to mobile nodes using the same HA (or cluster of HAs).

   The proposed enhancement enables two mobile nodes which know each
   other "fairly well" to "switch on" the RO mode without the need for
   any mobility signaling messages.









































Haddad                  Expires February 19, 2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         MIPv6 RO Mode Optimization            August 2010


2.  Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].














































Haddad                  Expires February 19, 2011               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         MIPv6 RO Mode Optimization            August 2010


3.  Motivation and Goal

   We start by highlighting first that the stunning rapid growth of
   social networks is by itself a great motivation to investigate how to
   adapt such highly successful "trend" on current protocols which will
   sooner or later impact social networking technologies.

   It is also well known that the RO mode enables a more efficient data
   packets exchange than the bidirectional tunneling and thus, should be
   used whenever possible unless the mobile node is not interested in
   disclosing its topological location, i.e., care-of address, for the
   CN (e.g., for privacy reasons).  However, MIPv6 RO mode requires
   exchanging a significant amount of signaling messages in order to
   establish, and periodically refresh a bidirectional security
   association (BSA) between the mobile node and the correspondent node
   (CN).  While the mobility signaling exchange severely impacts the
   handoff latency, the BSA is needed to authenticate one particular
   message only, namely the binding update (it can be argued that two
   messages are authenticated with the BSA but we note that sending a
   binding acknowledgement is not mandatory).  Last but not least, note
   that the amount of mobility signaling messages gets a boost when both
   endpoints are mobile.

   Our goal is to enable the RO mode between two mobile endpoints at
   minimum or no cost.  This means that two mobile nodes should be able
   -if they both explicitly ask for it- to switch from BT mode to RO
   mode without any signaling message exchange (i.e., in which case,
   there won't be any need for establishing a BSA).  Our optimization
   results in a much lower handoff latency when switching to the RO
   mode, the absence of BSA and all accompanying security concerns!





















Haddad                  Expires February 19, 2011               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         MIPv6 RO Mode Optimization            August 2010


4.  Protocol Description

   Our proposal considers that two mobile nodes which have established
   mutual social bonds, e.g., two "buddies", are capable of translating
   such relationship into a bidirectional cryptographic relationship on
   a network level.  At some particular point, the two "buddies" will
   confidentially disclose their crypto-relationship to their home
   agent, in order to request implementing a fast "zero signaling
   message" RO mode.

   However, it is important to mention that expressing mutual friendship
   is not limited to establishing crypto-relationships between two or
   more buddies.  In this proposal, we use the crypto-relationship only
   as an example, to demonstrate the effect of introducing a social
   dimension in optimizing dual mobility.

   To better clarify our ideas, we consider in the following a pair of
   mobile nodes, MN1 and MN2, which fulfills our requirement, then
   follow their movements outside their shared home network.  We
   consider that MN1 and MN2 have established a session and MN1 is the
   first to move outside the home network.  It follows that our proposal
   requires both mobile nodes to use the "cryptographically generated
   addresses" technique (described in [RFC3972]), in order to compute
   and auto-configure their IPv6 home addresses.  Establishing mutual
   cryptographic relationships can be achieved using for example, the
   "Secure Neighbor Discovery" protocol ([RFC3971]).

   The required mutual, i.e., bidirectional, cryptographic relationships
   between the two mobile nodes can be implemented following the
   description in [I-D.haddad-csi-symbiotic-sendproxy], and is supposed
   to be established only as a consequence of a mutual social
   relationship.  When MN2 establishes a unidirectional crypto-
   relationship with MN1, it generates a 128-bit modifier from hashing
   MN1's public key together with a 128-bit random number (RAN):

   Modifier = First [128, SHA-2(PK(MN1) | RAN) ]

   MN2 confidentially notifies MN1 about the RAN used to generate its
   CGA address and MN1 stores the RAN together with MN2's CGA address.
   As mentioned earlier, such unidirectional crypto-relationship can be
   seen as the translation of the social relationship into a network and
   security layer parameters.  This means that when using its CGA
   feature with other "stranger" nodes, MN2 does not need to disclose
   the roots of the modifier used to configure its CGA address.

   It becomes clear that in order to make full use of a crypto-
   relationship in our context, then it should also be established in
   the opposite direction, i.e., from MN1 to MN2.  Since the crypto-



Haddad                  Expires February 19, 2011               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         MIPv6 RO Mode Optimization            August 2010


   relationship is secure and unidirectional, each mobile node can
   confidentially share its own part of the bidirectional relationship
   with its HA whenever needed.  For this purpose, the IPsec tunnel
   established between the MN and its HA in order to encrypt the BU
   messages (and the data packets) is used and the "proof of
   relationship" is inserted in the first BU message sent by MN1 to its
   HA.  After validation, the HA stores the crypto-relationship in the
   binding cache entry (BCE) created for MN1.  No further action is
   taken until the other part of the crypto-relationship is also
   disclosed to the HA (i.e., recall that a crypto-relationship is
   unidirectional which means that a mutual one requires both parties to
   disclose each other's RAN and their signatures).

   At some point in time, MN2 decides also to move outside the home
   network and sends its first BU message to update its HA with its new
   CoA.  Since MN2 is still exchanging data packets with MN1, it inserts
   in the BU message the crypto-relationship it has established earlier
   with MN1.  When validating the BU message sent by MN2, the HA checks
   if the claimed crypto-relationship with MN1 is reciprocal, i.e., if
   the one between MN1 and MN2 is already stored in MN1's corresponding
   BCE, before sending a BA message to MN2.  In case a bidirectional
   relationship is confirmed, then and only then, can the HA send in
   parallel a BA message to MN2 in which, it includes MN1's CoA and
   another new message to MN1 (called "Neighbor Binding Update (NBU)")
   which carries MN2's freshly stored CoA.

   It follows immediately that the NBU message will enjoy the same
   security level than a classic BU message sent by a MN to its HA.
   This means that it can also be injected in the same IPsec tunnel
   already established between the MN and its HA.  The acknowledgement
   message called "Neighbor Binding Acknowledgement (NBA)" is also
   secured in the same way.  Note that the HA SHOULD set a new bit
   (called "Buddy" (B) bit) in the BA message sent to MN2, in order to
   notify it about a parallel update of MN1.

   The inclusion of MN1's CoA in the BA message together with sending an
   NBU message to MN1 allow both mobile nodes to quickly learn each
   other's current topological location from a "trusted" source, and to
   create the necessary binding in order to redirect their data packets
   on the optimized path.

   Note that in order to increase the overall performance, the HA can
   send multiple consecutive copies of the NBU messages until it
   receives the NBA message.

   Subsequent BU messages sent to the HA and carrying new CoAs are
   processed in the same way as the first one.  This means that the HA
   should always update the other mobile node and acknowledge the BU



Haddad                  Expires February 19, 2011               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         MIPv6 RO Mode Optimization            August 2010


   message at the same time.

   The suggested proposal can be extended to include multiple mobile
   nodes in which case the update would consist of sending one or
   multiple NBU message to the ones located outside the home network.














































Haddad                  Expires February 19, 2011               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         MIPv6 RO Mode Optimization            August 2010


5.  Dual Mobility With Different Home Networks

   In this section, we look at the scenario where the mobile "buddies",
   i.e., MN1 and MN2, have two different HAs, i.e., they belong to
   different home networks.  In order to enable implementing a
   simplified "zero signaling" RO mode between the two mobile nodes, we
   make the following two assumptions:

   - Each of the two HAs has an up-to-date list of other HAs IPv6
   addresses as well as their advertised prefix(es) and public keys.
   Consequently, when MN1 requests RO mode service from its own HA
   (i.e., by sending a BU message to HA1) for MN2's IPv6 address, then
   HA1 can lookup MN2's prefix and obtain HA2's corresponding
   parameters.

   - The two HAs can set up an IPsec tunnel between them.

   Note that the first assumption does not hint/imply that each HA
   should have a list of all available HAs around the globe.  In fact,
   the selected HAs are to be agreed upon between operators.  It follows
   that the RO mode service cannot be provided via an HA which is not
   included in the list stored by the other MN's HA.

   We consider in the following that the IPsec tunnel is already in
   place and we don't worry about how it is set up.  In the following
   scenario, MN1 sends the first BU message to its HA (i.e., HA1) while
   MN2 is still attached to its home network.  In the BU message sent to
   HA1, MN1 discloses its crypto-relationship with MN2 as an implicit
   request for enabling RO mode between the two mobile endpoints.  On
   HA1 side, the first step after creating a binding cache entry for MN1
   is to look-up parameters related to MN2's HA (i.e., HA2).

   After obtaining HA2's IPv6 address and public key, HA1 triggers the
   RO mode service by sending a new message to HA2 (called "RO Neighbor
   Solicitation (RNS)") in which, it requests confirmation for the
   mutual relationship between MN1 and MN2.  RNS message must carry
   MN1's HoA and CoA and the same associated binding lifetime stored by
   HA1.  Being sent through the IPsec tunnel, the RNS message is
   encrypted and integrity protected.  In addition, the HA may sign the
   message.

   When receiving a valid RNS message, HA2 checks its binding cache
   table for MN2's HoA.  If the binding is not found, e.g., MN2 is still
   attached to its home network, then HA2 stores the RNS parameters
   until the expiration of the lifetime suggested in the RNS message.
   This means that as long as MN1 keeps mentioning MN2's HoA in the BU
   messages sent to HA1, the latter must make sure that HA2 has also a
   valid request for enabling RO mode between MN1 and MN2.  After



Haddad                  Expires February 19, 2011               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         MIPv6 RO Mode Optimization            August 2010


   storing the RNS parameters, HA2 sends another new message called "RO
   Neighbor Present (RNP)" to HA1 in order to clarify MN2 status.  The
   RNP message is also encrypted and integrity protected as it is sent
   in the IPsec tunnel.  Note that HA1 does not need to wait for the RNP
   message before acknowledging the BU message from MN1.  In fact, as
   long as HA1 does not have any parameters related to MN2 stored in its
   cache memory, it can send the BA message immediately to MN1 and
   without carrying any additional information.

   When MN2 moves outside its home network, it sends a BU message to HA2
   in which, it discloses its relationship with MN1.  Such message
   triggers a lookup of MN1's HoA in HA2 cache memory which will
   ultimately return MN1's RNS parameters.  Following the lookup, HA2
   replies first to HA1 by sending an "RO Neighbor Update (RNU)" message
   which carries MN2's new CoA and HoA, then replies to MN2 with a BA
   message which carries MN1's CoA.  In the meantime, HA1 updates MN1
   with MN2's new CoA by sending an NBU message.  Note that HA2 may wait
   for an acknowledgement message from HA1, prior to sending the BA
   message with MN1's CoA.  The RNU message must be sent in the IPsec
   tunnel between the two HAs.  HA2 may also sign the message.

   It should also be mentioned that the above mechanism remains highly
   efficient in a "double jumping" scenario, at the potential cost of
   sending two NBU messages (one for each MN), which remains negligible.
   Note that an HA should always send the RNU message to the other HA
   before sending the BA message to its mobile node.

























Haddad                  Expires February 19, 2011              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         MIPv6 RO Mode Optimization            August 2010


6.  New Options, Bits and Messages Formats

   TBD
















































Haddad                  Expires February 19, 2011              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         MIPv6 RO Mode Optimization            August 2010


7.  Security Considerations

   This proposal aims to enhance the RO mode efficiency by removing the
   need for the return routability procedure.  Consequently, RO mode
   related mobility signaling messages exchange between the mobile node
   and the correspondent node are no more required.  Removing the RR and
   its justification, i.e., the BU/BA exchange, quickly eliminates the
   related threats and thus, contributes to further improving the
   overall security.

   Our suggested mechanism introduces two new signaling messages which
   are exchanged between the MN and its HA.  These two messages do not
   introduce any new threats nor amplify existing ones as they are
   exchanged within the IPsec ESP tunnel established between the MN and
   its HA.  In addition to the tunnel encryption and integrity
   protection between the MN and the HA, there is also a mutual trust
   between the two nodes which provide enough insurance about the
   validity of the message content.  This in turn, positively impacts
   the overall security of the procedure.  However, it should be
   highlighted that the mutual trust between the MN and the HA does not
   propagate among mobile nodes sharing the same HA.

   In fact, it can be argued that a simpler way to implement our
   protocol would be to let the mobile node update its HA with the list
   of IPv6 addresses which are used by his/her buddies.  In this case,
   the HA would consider an IPv6 address as a "proof of friendship" if
   it is sent by the first MN and also by the owner of the address.  We
   argue that such approach is flawed as it can disturb the mutual trust
   between the HA and MN by allowing the latter to claim fake
   relationship with the list of selected targets' IPv6 addresses
   without any additional proof.  Opening such hole would immediately
   raise doubts about why the HA and the MN should trust each other in
   the first place!  Furthermore, having multiple mobile nodes playing
   the same trick with the HA would increase the chances of assembling a
   fake bidirectional relationship between two mobile nodes which are
   only curious about each other's current location and would lead at
   least one of them to disclose its location to the other.














Haddad                  Expires February 19, 2011              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         MIPv6 RO Mode Optimization            August 2010


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-mext-rfc3775bis]
              Perkins, C., Johnson, D., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support
              in IPv6", draft-ietf-mext-rfc3775bis-06 (work in
              progress), July 2010.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3971]  Arkko, J., Kempf, J., Zill, B., and P. Nikander, "SEcure
              Neighbor Discovery (SEND)", RFC 3971, March 2005.

   [RFC3972]  Aura, T., "Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGA)",
              RFC 3972, March 2005.

8.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.haddad-csi-symbiotic-sendproxy]
              Haddad, W. and M. Naslund, "On Secure Neighbor Discovery
              Proxying Using 'Symbiotic' Relationship",
              draft-haddad-csi-symbiotic-sendproxy-01 (work in
              progress), July 2009.


























Haddad                  Expires February 19, 2011              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         MIPv6 RO Mode Optimization            August 2010


Author's Address

   Wassim Michel Haddad
   Ericsson
   300 Holger Dr
   San Jose, CA  95134
   US

   Phone: +1 646 256 2030
   Email: Wassim.Haddad@ericsson.com









































Haddad                  Expires February 19, 2011              [Page 14]


