


CLUE WG                                                          L. Xiao
Internet-Draft                                                   R. Even
Intended status: Informational             Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
Expires: January 7, 2013                                    July 6, 2012


              Use Case for Telemedical with Multi-streams
              draft-xiao-clue-telemedical-use-case-00.txt

Abstract

   This memo presenst a telemedicine use case where multiple
   presentation streams are used for conveying different information in
   parallel to the main video from the surgery room

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 7, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.





Xiao & Even              Expires January 7, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Telemedicine Use Case                July 2012


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Requirement for telemedical use case  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5











































Xiao & Even              Expires January 7, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Telemedicine Use Case                July 2012


1.  Introduction

   This use case describes a scenario where multiple presentation
   streams are used.  In this use case, the local site is a surgery room
   connected to one or more different types of remote sites.  In the
   local site three main cameras capture the whole room.  Multiple
   presentation inputs are possible: a surgery camera which is used to
   provide to zoomed view of the operation, an endoscopic monitor, an
   X-ray CT image output device, a B-ultrasonic apparatus, a cardiogram
   generator, an MRI image instrument, etc.  These devices are used to
   provide multiple local video presentation streams to help the surgeon
   monitor the status of the patient and assist the process of the
   surgery.

   Three main screens and one (or more) presentation screen(s) are
   provided.  The main screens can be used to display the remote
   experts.  The presentation screen(s) can be used to display multiple
   presentation streams from local and remote sites simultaneously.
   Three main cameras capture different parts of the surgery room.  The
   surgeon can decide the number, the size and the placement of the
   presentations displayed on the local presentation screen(s).  He can
   also indicate which local presentation captures are provided for the
   remote sites.  The local site can send multiple presentation captures
   to remote sites and it can receive multiple presentations related to
   the patient or the procedure from them.

   One type of remote site is a single or dual screen and one camera
   system with a consulting expert of a particular field present.  In
   the general case the remote sites can be part of a Telepresence
   conference with multiple experts to start a consultation.  The
   presentation screens are also provided at the remote sites allowing
   the experts to see the details of the operation and related data.
   Like the main site, the experts can decide the number, the size and
   the placement of the presentations displayed on the presentation
   screens.  The presentation screens can display presentation streams
   from the surgery room or other remote sites and also presentation
   streams generated locally by the remote site.  Thus the experts can
   also start sending presentation streams, which can carry medical
   records, pathology data, or their reference and analysis, etc.

   Another type of remote site is a typical immersive Telepresence room
   with three camera/screen pairs allowing more experts to join the
   consultation.  These sites can also be used for education.  The
   teacher and the students are in different remote sites.  Students can
   observe and learn the details of the whole procedure, while the
   teacher can explain and answer questions during the operation.

   Generally, the education sites can only send streams among



Xiao & Even              Expires January 7, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Telemedicine Use Case                July 2012


   themselves.  For example, they can share slides and videos, but
   neither their main captures nor their presentation captures are sent
   to other sites (i.e. the surgery room and the experts).

   All remote education sites can display the surgery room.  Or they can
   display it on the center screen, and the rest of the screens can show
   the teacher and the student who is asking a question.

   All remote sites shall display the zoomed surgery view on their
   presentation screen.  Other dynamic and static data can be optional
   and up to user's decision.

   For all the above sites, more presentation screens can be used to
   enhance visibility: one screen for zoomed surgery stream and the
   others for medical image streams, such as MRI images, cardiogram,
   B-ultrasonic images and pathology data.


2.  Requirement for telemedical use case

   1.  The solution must enable an endpoint to send and receive multiple
       presentation captures.

   2.  The solution must support a means to identify presentation
       captures, including the number, purpose, etc.

   3.  The solution must support multiple presentation sources from
       different endpoints at the same time.

   4.  The solution must support means of enabling interoperability
       between Telepresence endpoints that send and receive different
       numbers of presentation streams.

   5.  The solution must support means of enabling interoperability
       between Telepresence endpoints where presentation screens are of
       different resolutions.

   6.  The solution must enable an endpoint to mix multiple presentation
       captures locally.

   Note: the last two requirements are included in the CLUE requirement
   draft:


3.  IANA Considerations

   This document contains no IANA considerations.




Xiao & Even              Expires January 7, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Telemedicine Use Case                July 2012


4.  Security Considerations

   While there are likely to be security considerations for any solution
   for telepresence interoperability, this document has no security
   considerations.


5.  Informative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.


Authors' Addresses

   Lennard Xiao
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
   Shenzhen,
   PRC

   Email: lennard.xiao@huawei.com


   Roni Even
   Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
   Tel Aviv,
   Israel

   Email: even.roni@huawei.com






















Xiao & Even              Expires January 7, 2013                [Page 5]

