



INTERNET-DRAFT                                              K. Landfield
Intended Status: Informational                                    McAfee
Expires: April 18, 2011                                 October 15, 2010


       Naming Conventions for Vulnerabilities and Configurations
                  <draft-landfield-scap-naming-00.txt>


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html


Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



 


Landfield                Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 1]


INTERNET DRAFT          SCAP Naming Conventions         October 15, 2010


Abstract

   This document provides an overview of the naming conventions
   currently in use for vulnerabilities and configurations.


Table of Contents

   1  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
      1.1  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
      1.2	Purpose and Scope  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
      1.3	Audience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
      1.4	Document Structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2  Overview of Vulnerability Naming Schemes . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
      2.1	Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) . . . . . . . . . 4
      2.2	Common Configuration Enumeration (CCE) 5 . . . . . . . . . . 5
   3  Identifier Syntax  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
      3.1 CVE Identifier Syntax  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
      3.2 CCE Identifier Syntax  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
      4.1 Security Considerations for End User Organizations . . . . . 6
         4.1.1	Product and Service Selection and Design  . . . . . . . 7
         4.1.2	Vulnerability Communications and Reporting  . . . . . . 7
      4.2 Security Considerations for Software Developer and
          Service Providers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
         4.2.1	Name Creation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
         4.2.2	Name Use  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   5  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   6  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   7  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
   8.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   9  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
      9.1  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
      9.2  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   Author's Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10













 


Landfield                Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 2]


INTERNET DRAFT          SCAP Naming Conventions         October 15, 2010


1  Introduction

   This document provides an overview of the naming conventions
   currently in use for vulnerabilities and security configuration
   information.

1.1  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

1.2	Purpose and Scope

   The purpose of this document is to provide recommendations for using
   vulnerability naming schemes. The document covers two schemes: CVE
   and CCE. The document gives an introduction to both schemes and makes
   recommendations for end-user organizations on using the names
   produced by these schemes. The document also presents recommendations
   for software and service vendors on how they should use vulnerability
   names and naming schemes in their product and service offerings.

1.3	Audience

   The intended audience for this document is individuals who have
   responsibilities related to vulnerability management. 


1.4	Document Structure

   The remainder of this document is organized into the following major
   sections and appendices:
   *	Section 2 provides an overview of CVE and CCE.
   *	Section 3 describes the syntax of CVE and CCE identifiers.
   *	Section 4 gives recommendations to end-user organizations on using
   CVE and CCE, and makes recommendations for how IT product and service
   vendors should adopt CVE and CCE within their product and service
   offerings.
   *	Appendix A defines acronyms and abbreviations for the document.
   *	Appendix B lists related resources.

2  Overview of Vulnerability Naming Schemes 

   A vulnerability naming scheme is a systematic method for creating and
   maintaining a standardized dictionary of common names for a set of
   vulnerabilities in IT systems, such as software flaws in an operating
   system or security configuration issues in an application. The naming
   scheme ensures that each vulnerability entered into the dictionary
 


Landfield                Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 3]


INTERNET DRAFT          SCAP Naming Conventions         October 15, 2010


   has a unique name. Using standardized vulnerability naming schemes
   supports interoperability. Organizations typically have many tools
   for system security management that reference vulnerabilities?for
   example, vulnerability and patch management software, vulnerability
   assessment tools, antivirus software, and intrusion detection
   systems. If these tools do not use standardized names for
   vulnerabilities, it may not be clear that multiple tools are
   referencing the same vulnerabilities in their reports, and it may
   take extra time and resources to resolve these discrepancies and
   correlate the information. This lack of interoperability can cause
   delays and inconsistencies in security assessment, reporting,
   decision-making, and vulnerability remediation, as well as hampering
   communications both within organizations and between organizations.
   Use of standardized names also helps minimize confusion regarding
   which problem is being addressed, such as which vulnerabilities a new
   patch mitigates. This helps organizations to quickly identify the
   information they need, such as remediation information, when a new
   problem arises. This publication provides information and
   recommendations related to the two most widely used vulnerability
   naming schemes: Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE), and
   Common Configuration Enumeration (CCE). Both are described in detail
   below.

2.1	Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE)

   The CVE vulnerability naming scheme is for a dictionary of unique,
   common names for publicly known software flaws.  CVE provides the
   following:
   *	A comprehensive list of publicly known software flaws
   *	A globally unique name to identify each vulnerability
   *	A basis for discussing priorities and risks of vulnerabilities
   *	A way for a user of disparate products and services to integrate
   vulnerability information
   A CVE vulnerability entry consists of a unique identifier number, a
   short description of the vulnerability, and references to public
   advisories on the vulnerability. Figure 1 shows an example.

   CVE ID: 	CVE-2000-0001

   Description: 	RealMedia server allows remote attackers to cause a
   denial of service via a long ramgen request.

   References: 	
   BUGTRAQ: 19991222 RealMedia Server 5.0 Crasher (rmscrash.c)
   BID:888

   URL:http://www.securityfocus.com/bid/888

 


Landfield                Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 4]


INTERNET DRAFT          SCAP Naming Conventions         October 15, 2010


   XF:realserver-ramgen-dos


   Figure 1. Example CVE Entry

   Working with researchers, The MITRE Corporation assigns CVE IDs to publicly known vulnerabilities in commercial and open source software. General information on CVE is available at http://cve.mitre.org/. The National Vulnerability Database (NVD), which is maintained by NIST, provides several ways of accessing CVE entries. NVD offers CVE search capabilities, as well as a variety of XML and RSS data feeds with CVE entries and supplemental information to support security automation technologies. NVD is publicly available at http://nvd.nist.gov/. 
   The MITRE Corporation maintains information on the use of CVE. Vendors that include CVE identifiers in their security advisories are listed at http://cve.mitre.org/compatible/alerts_announcements.html. Products and services that have been reviewed and evaluated by the MITRE Corporation and determined to be ?CVE-compatible?, which means that they meet a set of CVE requirements, are listed at http://cve.mitre.org/compatible/compatible.html. 

2.2	Common Configuration Enumeration (CCE) 5

   The CCE 5 vulnerability naming scheme is for a dictionary of names for software security configuration settings. Each type of security-related configuration issue is assigned a unique identifier to facilitate fast and accurate correlation of configuration data across multiple information sources and products. 
   There are five attributes in a CCE entry: a unique identifier number, a description of the configuration issue, logical parameters of the CCE, the associated technical mechanisms related to the CCE, and references to additional sources of information. Figure 2 provides an example of these attributes for a CCE 5 entry for Windows XP.

   CCE ID: 	CCE-3108-8

   Description: 	The correct service permissions for the Telnet service should be assigned.

   Parameters:	(1) set of accounts (2) list of permissions

   Technical 
   Mechanisms: 	(1) set via Security Templates (2) defined by Group Policy

   References: 	Listed at http://cce.mitre.org/lists/cce_list.html 

                      Figure 2. Example CCE Entry

   The MITRE Corporation maintains and publishes the lists of CCE names.
   The lists, and additional information on CCE, are available at
   http://cce.mitre.org/.










Landfield                Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 5]


INTERNET DRAFT          SCAP Naming Conventions         October 15, 2010


3  Identifier Syntax

3.1 CVE Identifier Syntax

   The CVE identifier is a string and is composed of three components
   spearated by hyphens: the CVE prefix, the year, and the vulnerability
   number.

   The CVE prefix is the string "CVE".

   The year is the year that the vulnerability was identified.

   The vulnerability number is a four digit ASCII string and is assigned
   pseudo-randomly.  This prevents guessing the next CVE identifier;
   people would attempt to guess the identifier and this would result in
   name collisions when they guessed incorrectly. 

3.2 CCE Identifier Syntax

   The CCE identifier is a string and is composed of three components
   separated by hyphens: the CCE prefix, a configuration identifier
   number, and a check digit.

   The CCE prefix is the string "CCE".

   The configuration identifier number is a variable length ASCII
   numeric string and is assigned pseudo-randomly.  This prevents
   guessing the next CCE identifier; people would attempt to guess the
   identifier and this would result in name collisions when they guessed
   incorrectly.

   The check value is a single numeric character.  The Luhn check digit
   algorithm is used to generate the check value. [LUHN] The check digit
   addresses user entry problems, since administrators would routinely
   fat finger the identifier.

4  Security Considerations



4.1 Security Considerations for End User Organizations

   This section provides recommendations for end-user organizations on
   how they should take advantage of the CVE and CCE specifications to
   improve their system security management. For all recommendations in
   this section involving an organization using CVE and CCE names, the
   organization should use the authoritative names; locations for
   downloading these are listed in Section 2. Some of the
 


Landfield                Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 6]


INTERNET DRAFT          SCAP Naming Conventions         October 15, 2010


   recommendations in this section involve the Common Platform
   Enumeration (CPE) version 2.2 specification. CPE provides
   standardized, consistent names for referring to operating systems,
   hardware, and applications. CPE names are often used in conjunction
   with CVE and CCE names. Each CVE name and CCE name is related to one
   or more IT components, which can be expressed using CPE names. For
   example, a particular software flaw (identified by a CVE name) may
   affect seven products (identified by their CPE names). Using CPE
   names with CVE and CCE names further supports interoperability and
   standardization across products and services. The official CPE
   dictionary is available at http://nvd.nist.gov/cpe.cfm.

4.1.1	Product and Service Selection and Design

   1.	When evaluating IT products and services that use vulnerability
   names, such as for possible acquisition, organizations should take
   into consideration the products and services? support for CVE and/or
   CCE (as appropriate). Most organizations use a variety of products
   and services to detect, track, and mitigate vulnerabilities. Using
   standardized vulnerability names across products and services makes
   it much easier and faster to correlate information and to aggregate
   data from many disparate sources into a unified interface, such as a
   security dashboard. 

   2.	Organizations developing their own custom security software that
   will use vulnerability names should ensure that the software uses
   authoritative CVE and/or CCE names, as appropriate, and uses CPE
   names with them when indicating which IT products the CVE and CCE
   names apply to. Using CVE, CCE, and CPE names supports
   interoperability with other software and services.

4.1.2	Vulnerability Communications and Reporting

   1.	Organizations should use authoritative CVE and CCE names in their
   internal vulnerability assessment and reporting, including assessment
   reports, notifications to system owners of detected vulnerabilities,
   and alerts identifying the vulnerabilities being targeted by active
   exploits. Use of CVE and CCE names will help to minimize confusion
   regarding which vulnerability is being referenced and whether a
   particular vulnerability has been mitigated. Organizations should
   also use CPE names when indicating which IT products the
   vulnerabilities apply to.

   2.	Organizations should use authoritative CVE and CCE names in their
   external vulnerability communications, as well as the CPE names for
   the IT products that the vulnerabilities apply to. For example,
   communications to incident response teams should reference, when
   known, the CVE or CCE names of the vulnerabilities that are being
 


Landfield                Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 7]


INTERNET DRAFT          SCAP Naming Conventions         October 15, 2010


   exploited and the CPE names of the products that are being exploited.
   This ensures that incident communications precisely identify relevant
   vulnerabilities and affected products, enable correlation and
   integration of reports, and enable correlation with supplemental
   information residing in other data repositories. Another example is
   that organizations should use CVE and CCE names when communicating
   with vendors that support CVE and CCE names. Suppose that a vendor-
   supplied patch that purports to fix a vulnerability is defective; a
   statement to the vendor that a given CVE vulnerability remains after
   applying the patch conveys important information clearly and
   succinctly. Communications with vendors of scanning tools regarding
   false positives or false negatives will be clearer if the offending
   vulnerability is labeled by CVE or CCE name.

   3.	Organizations should encourage security software vendors to
   incorporate support for CVE and CCE into their products, as well as
   encourage all software vendors to include authoritative CVE and CCE
   names in their product security advisories and other security-related
   documentation and communications, as well as to reference the CPE
   names for their products. 

4.2 Security Considerations for Software Developer and Service Providers

   This section makes recommendations for how software developers and
   service providers should take advantage of CVE and CCE?s
   capabilities. This improves interoperability, thus increasing the
   efficiency of security management and improving the security of
   systems. Also, as described in the introduction to Section 3, using
   CPE names when indicating which products CVE and CCE names apply to
   further supports interoperability and standardization.

4.2.1	Name Creation

   1.	Software developers should participate in the CVE issuance
   processes to help ensure that CVEs provide the necessary information
   and are created in a timely manner, such as while planning a public
   vulnerability announcement or immediately after a vulnerability has
   been publicly announced. For more information on the CVE issuance
   process, see http://cve.mitre.org/cve/identifiers/index.html or
   contact cve@mitre.org. 

   2.	Authors of CVE names should reference applicable vendor patch
   identification whenever possible.

   3.	Software developers are encouraged to work with the MITRE
   Corporation to establish unique CCE identifiers for their products?
   security configuration settings. Basic information on this is
   available at http://cce.mitre.org/lists/creation_process.html.
 


Landfield                Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 8]


INTERNET DRAFT          SCAP Naming Conventions         October 15, 2010


   Software developers should contact the CCE Content Team at
   cce@mitre.org for more information on the process. 

4.2.2	Name Use

   1.	Software developers and service providers should incorporate
   support for CVE and CCE into their products and services that
   reference publicly known software vulnerabilities. Also, CPE names
   should be used when indicating which products the CVE and CCE names
   apply to.

   2.	Software developers and service providers should incorporate the
   appropriate authoritative CVE and/or CCE names in their security
   advisories and other vulnerability-related documentation and
   communications, as well as the CPE names that indicate which products
   the CVE and/or CCE names apply to. Using CVE, CCE, and CPE names
   supports the use of standardized security automation technologies,
   which rely on common vulnerability and product names, and ensures
   clarity when referencing a given vulnerability. 


5  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.

6  Security Considerations

   This document describes naming conventions and current processes for
   uniquely identify common security vulnerabilities and configuration
   information.  These processes do not directly create new security
   vulnerabilities, and establishing a common language for discussing
   vulnerabilities and configuration information permits a more robust
   dialogue regarding security problems.

   In some circumstances, disclosing configuration information may
   identify security vulnerabilities that could aid an attacker.  When
   sharing information regarding specific systems, administrators may
   wish to employ encryption. However, administrators should recognize
   that an attacker may have other opportunities to identify the
   vulnerability, so encrypting this information is not a substitute for
   closing vulnerabilities!


7  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.

   Future standardization work may create registries for IANA to
 


Landfield                Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 9]


INTERNET DRAFT          SCAP Naming Conventions         October 15, 2010


   maintain.

8.  Acknowledgements

   Much of the text in this document was taken from an ongoing revision
   of NIST Special Publication 800-51 by Dave Waltermire and Karen
   Scarfone.  Tim Polk and Dave Waltermire helped get the document into
   Internet-Draft format.

   This document was formatted using NroffEdit v 1.34 which is freely
   available from aaa-sec.com.


9  References 

9.1  Normative References

   [RFC2119]   S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
               Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [LUHN]   U.S. Patent 2,950,048, Computer for Verifying Numbers, Hans
               P. Luhn, August 23, 1960.


9.2  Informative References

   [CCE]   http://cce.mitre.org

   [CVE]   http://cve.mitre.org

Author's Addresses


   Kent Landfield
   McAfee

   EMail: kent_landfield@mcafee.com














Landfield                Expires April 18, 2011                [Page 10]

