


AUTOCONF Working Group                                      C. Bernardos
Internet-Draft                                                      UC3M
Intended status: Informational                             R. in 't Velt
Expires: April 22, 2010                                              TNO
                                                        October 19, 2009


       Addressing Model for Router Interfaces in Ad Hoc Networks
              draft-bernardos-autoconf-addressing-model-00

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 22, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   This document describes a practical IP addressing model for
   interfaces that take part in router-to-router communications in ad



Bernardos & in 't Velt   Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          autoconf addressing model           October 2009


   hoc networks.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Addressing model  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.1.  Scope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.2.  IPv4/IPv6 practical addressing model  . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     3.3.  DAD considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8



























Bernardos & in 't Velt   Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          autoconf addressing model           October 2009


1.  Introduction

   In order to communicate among themselves, ad hoc nodes [RFC2501] need
   to configure their network interface(s) with addresses that are valid
   within an ad hoc network.  Ad hoc nodes may also need to configure
   globally routable addresses, in order to communicate with devices on
   the Internet.  From the IP layer perspective, an ad hoc network
   presents itself as a L3 multi-hop network formed over a collection of
   links.

   This document describes a practical addressing model for ad hoc
   networks.  It is required that such models do not cause problems for
   ad hoc-unaware parts of the system, such as standard applications
   running on an ad hoc node or regular Internet nodes attached to the
   ad hoc nodes.


2.  Terminology

   Readers are expected to be familiar with all the terms defined in the
   RFC 2501 [RFC2501].  In addition the document makes use of the
   following definitions:

   Wireless Link

      Following [I-D.iab-ip-model-evolution], a "wireless link" in the
      IP service model refers to the topological area within which a
      packet with an IPv4 TTL or IPv6 Hop Limit of 1 can be delivered.
      That is, where no IP-layer forwarding (which entails a TTL/Hop
      Limit decrement) occurs between two nodes.  Due to the wireless
      nature of the link, the topological area is defined by the radio-
      range coverage of the wireless technology used, and therefore
      links are intermittent, and potentially short-lived.

   MANET interface

      Any interface over which a MANET protocol is run.

   MANET domain

      A MANET domain is delimited by a set of MANET routers that run a
      common MANET routing protocol and corresponds to its routing
      domain.

   Attached MANET (domain)

      A MANET domain attached to an infrastructure based network (e.g.,
      the Internet).  The MANET interfaces of routers of an attached



Bernardos & in 't Velt   Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          autoconf addressing model           October 2009


      MANET should be configured with unique global IP addresses, if
      these addresses are somehow exposed beyond the MANET domain.

   Non-overlapping prefix

      A set of IP prefixes is said to be non-overlapping if the
      following condition is met: there does not exist any IP address
      that could belong to more than one single IP prefix.  For example,
      2001:DB8:1:1::/64 and 2001:DB8:1:2::/64 are non-overlapping
      prefixes, while 2001:DB8:1::/48 and 2001:DB8:1:2::/64 are not.


3.  Addressing model

   This section describes a practical IPv4/IPv6 addressing model for ad
   hoc networks.  We first define the scope of the of the addressing
   model, then propose how to practically configure IP on MANET
   interfaces.  Finally, we provide some considerations on address
   uniqueness.

3.1.  Scope

   This document describes an addressing model for MANET interfaces.
   Regular (non-MANET) interfaces are not in the scope of the present
   document, and they could be configured using standard mechanisms
   (such as SLAAC [RFC4862] or DHCP [RFC2131], [RFC3315]).  Note, that
   while this document does not concern itself with mechanisms for
   obtaining prefixes for the purpose of configuring IP addresses on
   nodes reachable via non-MANET interfaces, such mechanisms are
   presumed to be in scope for the Autoconf WG.

   This document does not place restrictions on the use of IP addresses
   configured on MANET interfaces.  We assume that these IP addresses
   are used by MANET routing protocols.  We also assume, that once
   routes are in place, these addresses play a role in the forwarding of
   user data packets.  In particular, it is assumed that these addresses
   will be found as next-hop addresses in the routing tables of MANET
   routers.  This entails the performance of link-layer address
   resolution on these addresses.  Furthermore, these addresses may be
   used as source or destination addresses by end-user applications in
   those cases where such applications reside on MANET routers.

   This document considers MANET domains for the purposes of IP
   configuration.  Therefore, when we use the term "MANET" throughout
   this document, we are referring to a MANET domain.  For example,
   local uniqueness refer to uniqueness within the MANET domain.

   Globally unique IP addresses MUST be provided for routers of attached



Bernardos & in 't Velt   Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          autoconf addressing model           October 2009


   MANETs for those cases where these addresses are visible outside the
   MANET domain, while only uniqueness within the MANET domain is
   required for non-attached MANETs.

   This document does not rule out that IP addresses might be configured
   by non-autoconf mechanisms (e.g., manually) on MANET interfaces.

3.2.  IPv4/IPv6 practical addressing model

   This section describes the basic principles for IP addressing for
   MANET interfaces, in as much an IP version agnostic manner as
   possible.

   MANET interfaces of attached MANETs SHOULD be configured with global
   IPv6 addresses if these addresses are somehow exposed outside the
   MANET domain.  For non-attached MANETs, ULAs or global addresses
   SHOULD be used.

   Since the topology of a mobile ad hoc network is expected to be
   frequently changing, MANET interfaces MUST be configured with unique/
   non-overlapping prefixes.  This principle does not assume any prefix
   length.  The use of /32 (in the IPv4 case) or /128 (in the IPv6 case)
   prefix lengths can be an effective way to ensure that prefixes are
   non-overlapping.  However, it would be needlessly restrictive to
   mandate the use of only these prefix lengths.  Ensuring that
   configured prefixes on MANET interfaces with non-maximum lengths are
   non-overlapping is obviously easier for IPv6 than for IPv4, due to
   the larger addressing space.

   MANET interfaces MUST also be configured with IPv6 Link-local
   addresses (as required by RFC 4861 [RFC4861] and RFC 4291 [RFC4291]).
   Two main concerns may arise when considering the use of IPv6 Link-
   local addresses:

   o  Address uniqueness: the event of having two duplicate addresses in
      the same link has proved to be very low (EUI64 derived interface
      identifiers very rarely collide, since MAC addresses are expected
      to be globally unique), and even some mechanisms have been
      proposed to reduce the collision probability
      [I-D.soto-mobileip-random-iids].  Therefore, in most scenarios it
      is safe to assume that the probability of having two or more
      duplicated link-local addresses in a MANET is negiglible.  For
      those scenarios, in which this cannot be safely assumed, we refer
      to the DAD considerations of Section 3.3.

   o  Reachability: connectivity among neighbours in wireless links may
      be intermittent and/or short-lived.  Therefore, the use of link-
      local addresses may lead to reachability issues, since two nodes



Bernardos & in 't Velt   Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          autoconf addressing model           October 2009


      that were in direct coverage range at one moment, might not be
      anymore shortly after.  These problems might also arise in wired
      networks (nodes going up/down), but it is not the common case.

   Having brought to attention these concerns, it is further left to the
   designers of MANET routing protocols (and other protocols) to
   determine whether link-local addresses can be used in an effective
   way.

   Fluctuating reachability as discussed above is als of concern to the
   data forwarding process in ad hoc networks.  This is especially true,
   if existing mechanisms for neighbour discovery and address resolution
   are to be applied.  In order to mitigate these problems, several
   solutions may be used, such as (but not limited to): decrease some of
   the ND default timer values (specified in RFC 4861 [RFC4861]), such
   as REACHABLE_TIME, RETRANS_TIMER, DELAY_FIRST_PROBE_TIME,
   MIN_RANDOM_FACTOR, MAX_RANDOM_FACTOR; implement a stronger
   interaction between the MANET routing protocols and the ND process,
   so the MANET routing protocol helps to keep updated the ND tables.
   Finally, if none of these solutions (or alternative ones) may be
   implemented, processes running on the MANET routers that need to be
   isolated from this problem can decide not to use link-local addresses
   for their local communications.  Since IPv4 lacks any standardised
   unreachability detection mechanism, these considerations about
   reachability only concern IPv6.

   Configuration and use of IPv4 link-locals on MANET interfaces are not
   forbidden.  However, while in IPv6, an interface may be
   simultaneously configured with a link-local address and with unicast
   (global or local) addresses, this is not recommended in IPv4
   [RFC3927].

   Standard mechanisms for layer-2 address resolution, such as ND or ARP
   may be used for addresses configured on MANET interfaces.  The use of
   ARP requires the configuration of an IPv4 broadcast address on MANET
   interfaces.  This broadcast address MUST have a wider scope than the
   unique, non-overlapping prefix of the IPv4 address on the MANET
   interface.  (In IPv4-bases MANETs, 255.255.255.255 is often used).
   As mentioned before, the use of MANET routing protocols may also be
   considered as an alternative method for layer-2 address resolution.

3.3.  DAD considerations

   This document assumes DAD is disabled by default for the IP addresses
   configured on MANET interfaces (this is allowed in RFC 4862
   [RFC4862].  For the case of link-local addresses, we assume the
   collision probability is negiglible, and therefore it is safe to
   avoid the overhead of an active DAD process (which would need to be



Bernardos & in 't Velt   Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          autoconf addressing model           October 2009


   modified to be run in a MANET domain wide fashion).  For the case of
   the non-overlapping prefixes, we do not specify how their uniqueness
   is ensured (this is out-of-scope of this document and falls in the
   solution space).

   However, this document does not forbid the use of any DAD mechanism,
   if it is required in some certain scenarios.  From the point of view
   of MANETs, it seems appropriate to consider as well the use of
   passive DAD approaches (such as [I-D.weniger-autoconf-pdad-olsr]).


4.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.


5.  Security Considerations

   This document does currently not describe any security
   considerations.


6.  Acknowledgements

   Some of the ideas included in this draft have been proposed in the
   AUTOCONF ML by several people.  Thanks for all the AUTOCONF WG
   participants for the fruitful discussions over these years.

   The research of Carlos J. Bernardos leading to these results has
   received funding from the European Community's Seventh Framework
   Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement n. 214994 (CARMEN
   project) and also from the Ministry of Science and Innovation of
   Spain, under the QUARTET project (TIN2009-13992-C02-01).


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2131]  Droms, R., "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol",
              RFC 2131, March 1997.

   [RFC3315]  Droms, R., Bound, J., Volz, B., Lemon, T., Perkins, C.,
              and M. Carney, "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for
              IPv6 (DHCPv6)", RFC 3315, July 2003.



Bernardos & in 't Velt   Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          autoconf addressing model           October 2009


   [RFC3927]  Cheshire, S., Aboba, B., and E. Guttman, "Dynamic
              Configuration of IPv4 Link-Local Addresses", RFC 3927,
              May 2005.

   [RFC4291]  Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "IP Version 6 Addressing
              Architecture", RFC 4291, February 2006.

   [RFC4861]  Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman,
              "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 4861,
              September 2007.

   [RFC4862]  Thomson, S., Narten, T., and T. Jinmei, "IPv6 Stateless
              Address Autoconfiguration", RFC 4862, September 2007.

7.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.iab-ip-model-evolution]
              Thaler, D., "Evolution of the IP Model",
              draft-iab-ip-model-evolution-01 (work in progress),
              November 2008.

   [I-D.soto-mobileip-random-iids]
              Bagnulo, M., Soto, I., and A. Azcorra, "Random generation
              of interface identifiers",
              draft-soto-mobileip-random-iids-00 (work in progress),
              January 2002.

   [I-D.weniger-autoconf-pdad-olsr]
              Mase, K. and K. Weniger, "PDAD-OLSR: Passive Duplicate
              Address Detection for OLSR",
              draft-weniger-autoconf-pdad-olsr-01 (work in progress),
              June 2006.

   [RFC2501]  Corson, M. and J. Macker, "Mobile Ad hoc Networking
              (MANET): Routing Protocol Performance Issues and
              Evaluation Considerations", RFC 2501, January 1999.















Bernardos & in 't Velt   Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          autoconf addressing model           October 2009


Authors' Addresses

   Carlos J. Bernardos
   Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
   Av. Universidad, 30
   Leganes, Madrid  28911
   Spain

   Phone: +34 91624 6236
   Email: cjbc@it.uc3m.es
   URI:   http://www.it.uc3m.es/cjbc/


   Ronald in 't Velt
   TNO Information and Communication Technology
   Brassersplein 2
   Delft  2600 GB
   The Netherlands

   Phone: +31 15 2857306
   Email: Ronald.intVelt@tno.nl






























Bernardos & in 't Velt   Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 9]

