


MEXT Working Group                                         CJ. Bernardos
Internet-Draft                                            A. de la Oliva
Intended status: Informational                                      UC3M
Expires: September 8, 2011                                      F. Giust
                                                 IMDEA Networks and UC3M
                                                           March 7, 2011


 A IPv6 Distributed Client Mobility Management approach using existing
                               mechanisms
                    draft-bernardos-mext-dmm-cmip-00

Abstract

   The use of centralized mobility management approaches -- such as
   Mobile IPv6 -- poses some difficulties to operators of current and
   future networks, due to the expected large number of mobile users and
   their exigent demands.  All this has triggered the need for
   distributed mobility management alternatives, that alleviate
   operators' concerns allowing for cheaper and more efficient network
   deployments.

   This draft describes a possible way of achieving a distributed
   mobility behavior with Client Mobile IP, based on Mobile IPv6 and the
   use of Cryptographic Generated Addresses.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 8, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




Bernardos, et al.       Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           A DMM solution for CMIP              March 2011


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Description of the solution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8




























Bernardos, et al.       Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           A DMM solution for CMIP              March 2011


1.  Introduction

   Most of the currently standardized IP mobility solutions, like Mobile
   IPv6 [RFC3775], or Proxy Mobile IPv6 [RFC5213] rely to a certain
   extent on a centralized mobility anchor entity.  This centralized
   network node is in charge of both the control of the network entities
   involved in the mobility management (i.e., it is a central point for
   the control signalling), and the user data forwarding (i.e., it is
   also a central point for the user plane).  This makes centralized
   mobility solutions prone to several problems and limitations, as
   identified in [I-D.chan-distributed-mobility-ps]: longer (sub-
   optimal) routing paths, scalability problems, signaling overhead (and
   most likely a longer associated handover latency), more complex
   network deployment, higher vulnerability due to the existence of a
   potential single point of failure, and lack of granularity on the
   mobility management service (i.e., mobility is offered on a per-node
   basis, not being possible to define finer granularity policies, as
   for example per-application).

   There are basically two main approaches that are being researched
   now: one aimed at making Mobile IPv6 work in a distributed way, and
   another one doing the same exercise for Proxy Mobile IPv6.  In this
   draft we describe a solution to achieve a DMM behavior with a CMIP
   (MIPv6) solution.  This document is based on a research paper of the
   same authors, called "Flat Access and Mobility Architecture: an IPv6
   Distributed Client Mobility Management solution" [GOB+11].


2.  Terminology

   The following terms used in this document are defined in the Mobile
   IPv6 specification [RFC3775]:

      Home Agent (HA)

      Home Link

      Home Address (HoA)

      Care-of Address (CoA)

      Binding Update (BU)

      Binding Acknowledgement (BA)

   The following terms are defined and used in this document:





Bernardos, et al.       Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           A DMM solution for CMIP              March 2011


   DAR (Distributed Anchor Router).  First hop routers where the mobile
      nodes attach to.  They also play the role of mobility managers for
      the IPv6 addresses they anchor.

   HDAR (Home Distributed Anchor Router).  DAR which plays the role of
      Home Agent for a particular IPv6 address (i.e., DAR where that
      IPv6 address is anchored).


3.  Description of the solution

   Distributed Mobility Management approaches try to overcome the
   limitations of the traditional centralized mobility management, i.e.,
   Mobile IP, by bringing the mobility anchor closer to the MN.
   Following this idea, in our approach -- that we call Flat Access and
   Mobility Architecture (FAMA) -- the MIPv6 centralized home agent is
   moved to the edge of the network, being deployed in the default
   gateway of the mobile node.  That is, the first elements that provide
   IP connectivity to a set of MNs are also the mobility managers for
   those MNs.  In the following we will call these access routers
   Distributed Anchor Routers (DARs).

   Every time a mobile node attaches to a distributed anchor router, it
   gets an IPv6 address which is topologically anchored at the DAR.
   That means that while attached to this DAR, the mobile can send and
   receive traffic using that address without using any tunneling nor
   special packet handling.  Every time the mobile node moves to a
   different DAR, it gets a new IPv6 address from the new access router.
   In case the MN wants to keep the reachability of the IPv6 address(es)
   it obtained from the previous DAR (note that this decision is dynamic
   and it is out of scope of this document, it can be done on an
   application basis for example), the mobile has to involve its MIPv6
   stack, by sending a Binding Update to the DAR where the IPv6 address
   is anchored, using the address obtained from the current DAR as
   care-of address.  In this way, the IPv6 address that the node wants
   to maintain plays the role of home address, and the DAR from where
   that address was configured plays the role of Home Agent (for that
   particular address).  Note that the FAMA approach basically enables a
   mobile node to simultaneously handle several IPv6 addresses -- each
   of them anchored at a different DAR -- ensuring their continuous
   reachability by using Mobile IPv6 in a distributed fashion (i.e.,
   each access router is a potential home agent for the address it
   delegates, if required).  This distributed address anchoring is
   enabled on demand and on a per-address granularity, which means that
   depending on the user needs, it might be the case that all, some or
   none of the IPv6 addresses that a mobile node configures while moving
   within a FAMA domain, are kept reachable and used by the mobile.




Bernardos, et al.       Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           A DMM solution for CMIP              March 2011


   In traditional Mobile IPv6, the communication between the MN and the
   HA is secured through IPsec [RFC4877].  Following a similar approach
   in FAMA is difficult due to the large number of security associations
   that would be required, since any gateway of the access network can
   play the role of home agent for any mobile node.  In order to
   overcome this problem and provide authentication between the DAR and
   the MNs, we propose the use of Cryptographically Generated Addresses
   [RFC3972] (CGAs), as introduced in [I-D.laganier-mext-cga].  CGAs are
   a powerful mechanism allowing authentication of the packets and
   requires no public-key infrastructure, hence it is well-suited for
   this application.

   Following the ideas presented above, every time an MN attaches to a
   DAR, it configures a CGA from a prefix anchored at the DAR (e.g., by
   using stateless address auto-configuration mechanisms).  This address
   can then be used by the MN to establish a communication with a remote
   Correspondent Node (CN) while attached to that particular DAR.  If
   the mobile then moves to a new DAR (nDAR), the following two cases
   are possible: i) there is no need for the address that was configured
   at the previous DAR (pDAR) to survive the movement: in this case
   there is no further action required; ii) the mobile wants to keep the
   reachability of the address configured at pDAR: in this case Mobile
   IPv6 is triggered, and the MN sends a Binding Update (BU) message to
   the pDAR, using the address configured at the previous DAR as home
   address, and the address configured at the new DAR as care-of
   address.  This BU includes the CGA parameters and signature
   [I-D.laganier-mext-cga], which are used by the receiving DAR to
   identify the MN as the legitimate owner of the address.  Although the
   use of CGAs does not impose a heavy burden in terms of performance,
   depending on the number of MNs handled at the DAR, the processing of
   the CGAs can be problematic.  To reduce the complexity of the
   proposed protocol, we suggest an alternative mechanism to
   authenticate any subsequent signaling packets exchanged between the
   MN and the DAR (in case the mobile performs a new attachment to a
   different DAR).  This alternative method relies on the use of a
   Permanent Home Keygen Token (PHKT), which will be used to generate
   the Authorization option that the MN has to include in all next
   Binding Update messages.  This token is forwarded to the MN in the
   Binding Acknowledgment message, sent on reply to the BU.  The
   procedure is depicted in Figure 1.  Once the signaling procedure is
   completed, a bi-directional tunnel is established between the mobile
   node and the DAR where the IPv6 address is anchored (the "home" DAR
   -- HDAR -- for that particular address), so the mobile can continue
   using the IPv6 address.







Bernardos, et al.       Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           A DMM solution for CMIP              March 2011


           ------                               -------
           | MN |                               | DAR |
           ------                               -------
             |                                     |
        CGA  |                                     |
      config |-- BU + CGA param + signature ------>|
             |                                     |  MN
       PHKT  |<----------------------- BA + PHKT --| auth
     caching |                                     |
             |                                     |
                        (first handoff)

      PHKT   |                                     |
     refresh,|                                     |
      next   |-- BU(PHKT auth) ------------------->|
    handoffs,|                                     |  MN
      de-reg |<------------------------------ BA --| auth
             |                                     |
             |                                     |
                     (subsequent signaling)

              Figure 1: Signaling between the MN and the DAR

   In case the MN performs any subsequent movements and it requires to
   maintain the reachability of an address for which it has already sent
   a BU, the following BU messages can be secured using the PHKT
   exchanged before, reducing the computational load at the receiving
   DAR.

   Note that on every attachment of a node to a DAR, the terminal also
   obtains a new IPv6 address which is topologically anchored at that
   DAR, and that this address can be used for new communications
   (avoiding in this way the tunneling required when using an address
   anchored at a different DAR).  A mobile can keep multiple IPv6
   addresses active and reachable at a given time, and that requires to
   send -- every time the MN moves -- a BU message to all the previous
   DARs that are anchoring the IP flows that the MN wish to maintain.


4.  IANA Considerations

   TBD.


5.  Security Considerations

   Although the approach documented in this document is attractive for
   the reduced signaling overhead caused by the mobility support, it can



Bernardos, et al.       Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           A DMM solution for CMIP              March 2011


   be misused in some particular scenarios by malicious nodes that wish
   to export an incorrect CoA in the BU message, since it does provide
   proof of the MN's reachability at the visited network.  Indeed, the
   CGA approach assures that the BU message has been sent by the
   legitimate HoA's owner but it does not make sure that same MN to be
   reachable at the CoA indicated.  This requires further analysis.

   A possible approach to provide a more secure solution is the
   following: a Return Routability procedure similar to the one defined
   in MIPv6 Route Optimization can be used to mitigate the
   aforementioned security issue.  The Return Routability procedure
   starts after the handoff.  Instead of sending the BU message, the MN
   sends a Care-of Test Init message (CoTI).  This message is replied by
   the DAR with a Care-Of Test message containing a CoA Keygen Token.
   The MN can now send a BU using both Home and CoA Keygen tokens to
   proof its reachability at both the HoA and the CoA.  The message and
   the knowledge of both tokens is a proof that the MN is the legitimate
   node who has sent the BU and also is reachable at the CoA indicated.
   As all security improvements, the one proposed incurs in a
   performance penalty, in this case an increase in the handover delay.
   Specifically this enhanced security approach requires four messages
   to be exchanged between the MN and the DAR instead of the two
   messages of the original solution.  In terms of handover delay, it
   increases it by a factor of two, as the new solution requires to two
   Round Trip Times (RTTs) to conclude, instead of one.


6.  Acknowledgments

   The research leading to these results has received funding from the
   European Community's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7-ICT-2009-5)
   under grant agreement n. 258053 (MEDIEVAL project).  The work of
   Carlos J. Bernardos has also been partially supported by the Ministry
   of Science and Innovation of Spain under the QUARTET project
   (TIN2009-13992-C02-01).


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC3775]  Johnson, D., Perkins, C., and J. Arkko, "Mobility Support
              in IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [RFC3972]  Aura, T., "Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGA)",
              RFC 3972, March 2005.

   [RFC4877]  Devarapalli, V. and F. Dupont, "Mobile IPv6 Operation with



Bernardos, et al.       Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           A DMM solution for CMIP              March 2011


              IKEv2 and the Revised IPsec Architecture", RFC 4877,
              April 2007.

   [RFC5213]  Gundavelli, S., Leung, K., Devarapalli, V., Chowdhury, K.,
              and B. Patil, "Proxy Mobile IPv6", RFC 5213, August 2008.

7.2.  Informative References

   [GOB+11]   Giust, F., de la Oliva, A., and CJ. Bernardos, "Flat
              Access and Mobility Architecture: an IPv6 Distributed
              Client Mobility Management solution", 3rd IEEE
              International Workshop on Mobility Management in the
              Networks of the Future World (MobiWorld 2011), colocated
              with IEEE INFOCOM 2011 , 2011.

   [I-D.chan-distributed-mobility-ps]
              Chan, A., Liu, D., Seite, P., Yokota, H., Perkins, C.,
              Melia, T., Haddad, W., Demaria, E., Deng, H., and Z. Cao,
              "Problem statement for distributed and dynamic mobility
              management", draft-chan-distributed-mobility-ps-00 (work
              in progress), October 2010.

   [I-D.laganier-mext-cga]
              Laganier, J., "Authorizing Mobile IPv6 Binding Update with
              Cryptographically Generated Addresses",
              draft-laganier-mext-cga-01 (work in progress),
              October 2010.


Authors' Addresses

   Carlos J. Bernardos
   Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
   Av. Universidad, 30
   Leganes, Madrid  28911
   Spain

   Phone: +34 91624 6236
   Email: cjbc@it.uc3m.es
   URI:   http://www.it.uc3m.es/cjbc/











Bernardos, et al.       Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           A DMM solution for CMIP              March 2011


   Antonio de la Oliva
   Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
   Av. Universidad, 30
   Leganes, Madrid  28911
   Spain

   Phone: +34 91624 8803
   Email: aoliva@it.uc3m.es
   URI:   http://www.it.uc3m.es/aoliva/


   Fabio Giust
   Institute IMDEA Networks and Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
   Av. del Mar Mediterraneo, 22
   Leganes, Madrid  28918
   Spain

   Email: fabio.giust@imdea.org

































Bernardos, et al.       Expires September 8, 2011               [Page 9]

