A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3297

        Title:      Content Negotiation for Messaging Services based
                    on Email
        Author(s):  G. Klyne, R. Iwazaki, D. Crocker
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       July 2002
        Mailbox:    GK@ACM.ORG, iwa@rdl.toshibatec.co.jp,
                    dcrocker@brandenburg.com 
        Pages:      47
        Characters: 97094
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-fax-content-negotiation-05.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3297.txt


This memo describes a content negotiation mechanism for facsimile,
voice and other messaging services that use Internet email.

Services such as facsimile and voice messaging need to cope with
new message content formats, yet need to ensure that the content of
any given message is renderable by the receiving agent.  The
mechanism described here aims to meet these needs in a fashion that
is fully compatible with the current behaviour and expectations of
Internet email.

This document is a product of the Internet Fax Working Group of the
IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
