A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3460

        Title:      Policy Core Information Model (PCIM) Extensions
        Author(s):  B. Moore, Ed.
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       January 2003
        Mailbox:    remoore@us.ibm.com
        Pages:      93
        Characters: 212453
        Updates:    3060

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-policy-pcim-ext-08.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3460.txt


This document specifies a number of changes to the Policy Core
Information Model (PCIM, RFC 3060).  Two types of changes are
included.  First, several completely new elements are introduced, for
example, classes for header filtering, that extend PCIM into areas
that it did not previously cover.  Second, there are cases where
elements of PCIM (for example, policy rule priorities) are deprecated,
and replacement elements are defined (in this case, priorities tied to
associations that refer to policy rules).  Both types of changes are
done in such a way that, to the extent possible, interoperability with
implementations of the original PCIM model is preserved.  This
document updates RFC 3060.

This document is a product of the Policy Framework Working Group of
the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.