


Internet Engineering Task Force                           T. Narten, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                       IBM
Intended status: Informational                              M. Sridharan
Expires: March 4, 2012                                         Microsoft
                                                          September 2011


    Problem Statement: Using L3 Overlays for Network Virtualization
             draft-narten-nvo3-overlay-problem-statement-00

Abstract

   This document lays out the case for developing L3 overlays to provide
   network virtualization.  In addition, the document describes what
   issues need to be resolved in order to produce an interoperable
   standard.  The goal is lead to scalable, interoperable
   implementations of virtualization overlays based on standardized
   encapsulation methods and control plane approaches.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 4, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Narten & Sridharan        Expires March 4, 2012                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   L3 Overlays for Network Virtualization   September 2011


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Problem Details  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Limitations Imposed by Spanning Tree and VLAN Spaces . . .  4
     2.2.  Multitenant Environments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.3.  Stretching of L2 Domain  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.4.  Inadequate MAC Table Sizes in Switches . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.5.  Decoupling Logical and Physical Configuration  . . . . . .  6
   3.  Overlay Network Framework  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  Overlay Design Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Standardization Issues for Overlay Networks  . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  Benefits of an Overlay Approach  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Related Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.1.  ARMD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.2.  Trill  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     6.3.  L2VPNs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.4.  Proxy Mobile IP  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       6.4.1.  LISP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  Further Work . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   8.  Summary  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   9.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   10. IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   11. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   12. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14





















Narten & Sridharan        Expires March 4, 2012                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   L3 Overlays for Network Virtualization   September 2011


1.  Introduction

   Server virtualization is increasingly becoming the norm in data
   centers.  With server virtualization, each physical server supports
   multiple virtual machines (VMs), each running its own operating
   system, middleware and applications.  Virtualization is a key enabler
   of workload agility, i.e., allowing any server to host any
   application and providing the flexibility of adding, shrinking, or
   moving services within the physical infrastructure.  Server
   virtualization provides numerous benefits, including higher
   utilization, increased data security, reduced user downtime, reduced
   power usage, etc.

   Server virtualization is driving and accentuating scaling limitations
   in existing datacenter networks.  Placement and movement of VMs in a
   network effectively requires that VM IP addresses be fixed and
   static.  While a VM's IP address could be updated to always be
   consistent with the VM's current point of attachment, changing the
   VM's address makes it difficult for the VM to be reached by clients,
   and breaks any open TCP connections.  Thus, from an IP perspective,
   VM's can generally only move within a single IP subnet.  Having VMs
   move to different subnets (while retaining their previous IP
   addresses) requires taking additional steps at the IP routing level
   to ensure that traffic continues to reach the VM at its new location.
   In practice, this leads to a desire for larger and flatter L2
   networks, so that a given VM can be placed (or moved to) anywhere
   within the datacenter, without being constrained by subnet boundary
   concerns.

   The general scaling problems of large, flat L2 networks are well
   known.  In traditional data center architectures using Spanning
   Trees, the size of a layer 2 domain is generally limited to two tiers
   (access and aggregation), limiting the number of hosts within a
   single L2 domain.  Current network deployments, however, are
   experiencing additional and new pain points.  The increase in both
   the number of physical machines, and the number of VMs per physical
   machine has lead to MAC address explosion whereby switches need to
   have increasingly large forwarding tables to handle the traffic they
   switch.  Furthermore, the dynamic nature of VM creation, deletion and
   movement between between servers is leading to sub-optimal broadcast
   domain expansion.  Finally, the 4094 VLAN limit is no longer
   sufficient in a shared infrastructure servicing multiple tenants.

   This document outlines the problems encountered in scaling L2
   networks in a datacenter and makes the case that an overlay based
   approach, where individual L2 networks are implemented within
   individual L3 "domains" provide a number of advantages over current
   approaches.  The goal is lead to scalable, interoperable



Narten & Sridharan        Expires March 4, 2012                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   L3 Overlays for Network Virtualization   September 2011


   implementations of virtualization overlays based on standardized
   encapsulation methods and control plane approaches.

   Section 2 describes the problem space in detail.  Section 3 provides
   a general discussion of overlays.  Section 4 covers standardization
   issues and possible work areas.  Section 5 summarizes the benefits of
   an overlay approach.  Section 6 and 7 discuss related work and
   further work.


2.  Problem Details

2.1.  Limitations Imposed by Spanning Tree and VLAN Spaces

   Years of operational experience with Spanning Tree Protocol has led
   to best practices that limit topologies to two tiers, access and
   aggregation, with the STP root at the aggregation switch.  Such
   topologies limit both the number of servers that can be connected to
   the same layer 2 domain, and the amount of East-West bandwidth
   available between servers connected to different access switches.
   Newer initiatives like Trill overcome these topology restrictions and
   allow high cross-sectional bandwidth between servers as well as large
   layer 2 domains, but require new networking equipment.  Another way
   to expand the layer 2 domains, but stay within the topology
   restrictions imposed by using STP, is to use Overlay Transport
   Virtualization [I-D.hasmit-otv] to interconnect the individual STP
   topologies.

   Yet another approach for increasing East-West bandwidth is to
   constrain the layer 2 domain to stay within the access switch, and
   terminate layer 3 in the access switch as well.  All communications
   between servers connected to different access switches happens over
   IP.  However, this is incompatible with the desire to be able to move
   VMs anywhere within the datacenter while maintaining Layer 2
   adjacency between the VMs.

   Another characteristic of Layer 2 data center networks is their use
   of Virtual LANs (VLANs) to provide broadcast isolation.  A 12-bit
   VLAN ID is used in the Ethernet data frames to divide the larger
   Layer 2 network into multiple broadcast domains.  VLANs have worked
   well in smaller data centers which are limited to less than 4094
   VLANs.  The growing demand for multitenancy, e.g., for clouds,
   further accelerate the need for larger VLAN limits, as discussed
   below.  Finally, some switching equipment supports less than the 4094
   maximum limit of VLANs.






Narten & Sridharan        Expires March 4, 2012                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   L3 Overlays for Network Virtualization   September 2011


2.2.  Multitenant Environments

   Cloud computing involves on-demand elastic provisioning of resources
   for multitenant environments.  The most common example of cloud
   computing is the public cloud, where a cloud service provider offers
   these elastic services to multiple customers over the same
   infrastructure.

   Isolation of network traffic by tenant could be done via Layer 2 or
   Layer 3 networks.  For Layer 2 networks, VLANs are often used to
   segregate traffic - so a tenant could be identified by its own VLAN,
   for example.  Due to the large number of tenants that a cloud
   provider might service, the 4094 VLAN limit is often inadequate.  In
   addition, there is often a need for multiple VLANs per tenant, which
   exacerbates the issue.  Note that there is a proposal in the Trill
   working group to increase the VLAN space from 12 to 24 bits using two
   concatenated 12-bit tags [I-D.eastlake-trill-rbridge-fine-labeling].
   Additionally, IEEE 802.1aq has defined double tagging.

   Layer 3 networks are not a complete solution for multi tenancy
   either.  Two tenants might use the same set of Layer 3 addresses
   within their networks which requires the cloud provider to provide
   isolation in some other form.  Further, requiring all tenants to use
   IP excludes customers relying on direct Layer 2 or non-IP Layer 3
   protocols for inter VM communication, which puts limitations on
   moving some applications onto a virtualized server environment.

2.3.  Stretching of L2 Domain

   Another use case is cross pod expansion.  A pod typically consists of
   one or more racks of servers with its associated network and storage
   connectivity.  Tenants may start off on a pod and, due to expansion,
   require servers/VMs on other pods, especially the case when tenants
   on the other pods are not fully utilizing all their resources.  This
   use case requires a "stretched" Layer 2 environment connecting the
   individual servers/VMs.

2.4.  Inadequate MAC Table Sizes in Switches

   Today's virtualized environments place additional demands on the MAC
   address tables of layer 2 switches.  Instead of just one MAC address
   per server link, the switching infrastructure now has to learn the
   MAC addresses of the individual VMs (which could range in the 100s
   per server).  This is a requirement since traffic from/to the VMs to
   the rest of the physical network will traverse the switched
   infrastructure.  This places a much larger demand on the switches'
   MAC table capacity compared to non-virtualized environments.




Narten & Sridharan        Expires March 4, 2012                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   L3 Overlays for Network Virtualization   September 2011


   If the table overflows, the switches do not learn new entries until
   idle entries age out.  This leads to flooding the frames over the
   entire VLAN in accordance with IEEE standards.

2.5.  Decoupling Logical and Physical Configuration

   Data center operators must be able to achieve high utilization of
   server and network capacity.  In order to achieve efficiency it
   should be possible to assign workloads that operate in a single
   Layer-2 network to any server in any rack in the network.  It should
   also be possible to migrate workloads to any server anywhere in the
   network while retaining the workload's addresses.  This can be
   achieved today by stretching VLANs (e.g., by using Trill or OTV).
   However, in order to limit the broadcast domain of each VLAN, all
   VLANs should not be configured to flow to every server in the
   datacenter.  When workloads migrate, the physical network (e.g.,
   server access lists) need to be reconfigured which is typically time
   consuming and error prone.  By decoupling the network addresses used
   by the VMs when communicating with each other from the network
   addresses of the servers they are currently hosted on, the network
   administrator can configure the network once and not every time a
   service migrates.  This decoupling enables any server to become part
   of any server resource pool.


3.  Overlay Network Framework

   The idea behind overlays is straightforward.  Take the set of
   machines that are allowed to communicate with each other and group
   them into a high-level construct called a domain.  A domain could be
   one L2 VLAN, a single IP subnet, or just an arbitrary collection of
   machines.  The domain identifies the set of machines that are allowed
   to communicate with each other directly, and provides isolation from
   machines not within the same domain.  The overlay connects the
   machines of a particular domain together.  A switch connects each
   machine to its domain, accepting ethernet frames from attached VMs
   and encapsulating them for transport across the IP overlay.  An
   egress switch decapsulates the frame and delivers it to the target
   VM.

3.1.  Overlay Design Characteristics

   There are existing layer 2 overlay protocols in existence, but they
   were not necessarily designed to solve the problem in the environment
   of a highly virtualized datacenter.  Below are some of the
   characteristics of environments that must be taken into account by
   the overlay technology:




Narten & Sridharan        Expires March 4, 2012                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   L3 Overlays for Network Virtualization   September 2011


   1.  Highly distributed systems.  The overlay should work in an
       environment where there could be many thousands of access
       switches (e.g. residing within the hypervisors) and many more end
       systems (e.g.  VMs) connected to them.  This leads to a
       distributed mapping system that puts a low overhead on the
       overlay tunnel endpoints.

   2.  Many highly distributed segments with sparse connectivity.  Each
       overlay segment could be highly dispersed inside the datacenter.
       Also, along with expectation of many overlay segments, the number
       of end systems connected to any one segment is expected to be
       relatively low; Therefore, the percentage of access switches
       participating in any one overlay segment would also be expected
       to be low.

   3.  Highly dynamic end systems.  End systems connected to segments
       can be very dynamic, both in terms of creation/deletion/power-on/
       off and in terms of mobility across the access switches.

   4.  Work with existing, widely deployed network Ethernet switches and
       IP routers without requiring wholesale replacement.

   5.  Network infrastructure administered by a single administrative
       domain.  This is consistent with operation within a datacenter,
       and not across the internet.

   6.  Low access switch overhead / simple implementation.  With the
       requirement to support very large numbers of access switches, the
       resource requirements on each switch should not be intensive both
       in terms of memory footprint or processing cycles.  This also
       means consideration for hardware offload.


4.  Standardization Issues for Overlay Networks

   To provide a robust and interoperable overlay solution, a number of
   issues need to be considered.  First, an overlay header is needed for
   transporting encapsulated Ethernet frames across the IP network to
   their ultimate destination within a specific domain.  To provide
   multi-tenancy, the overlay header needs a field to identify which
   domain an encapsulated packet belongs to.  Consequently, some sort of
   Domain Identifier is needed.  VXLAN [I-D.mahalingam-dutt-dcops-vxlan]
   uses a 24-bit VXLAN Network Identifier (VNI), while NVGRE
   [I-D.sridharan-virtualization-nvgre] uses a 24-bit Tenant Network
   Identifier (TNI).

   The details of a specific overlay header format need to be worked
   out.  Questions to be resolved include whether to use existing



Narten & Sridharan        Expires March 4, 2012                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   L3 Overlays for Network Virtualization   September 2011


   standard formats such as GRE [RFC2784] [RFC2890], or to define one
   specifically tailored to meet the requirements of an overlay network.
   One issue concerns whether to use UDP (in order to facilitate
   transport through middlebox devices) or to build directly on top of
   IP as GRE does.  If the primary deployment environment is
   datacenters, and paths will not generally cross the public internet,
   middlebox traversal may not be a significant concern.  Additionally,
   the encapsulated payload could include a full Ethernet header,
   including source and destination MAC addresses, VLAN information,
   etc., or some subset thereof.  Finally, the encapsulation will need
   to consider whether inclusion of a checksum is necessary or whether
   it imposes unacceptable overhead (when encapsulated packets are
   themselves IP, they will carry their own end-to-end checksums).  Note
   that GRE supports an optional checksum.  In IPv4, UDP checksums can
   be disabled by setting the UDP checksum field to zero, but checksums
   must always be included in IPv6.  The 6man working group is currently
   considering relaxing the IPv6 UDP checksum requirement
   [I-D.ietf-6man-udpzero].

   Separate from encapsulation, an address mapping system is needed to
   map the destination address as specified by the originating VM into
   the egress IP address of the router to which the Ethernet frame will
   be tunneled.  VXLAN uses a "learning" approach for this, similar to
   what L2 bridges use.  NVGRE has not indicated how it proposes to
   perform address mapping, leaving details for a later document.  Other
   approaches are possible, such as managing mappings in a centralized
   mapping system.  Use of a centralized mapping system would require
   development of a protocol for distributing address mappings from the
   controller to the switches where encapsulation takes place.

   Another aspect of address mapping concerns the handling of broadcast
   and multicast frames, or the delivery of unicast packets when no
   mapping exists.  One approach is to flood such frames to all machines
   belonging to the domain.  Both VXLAN and NVGRE suggest associating an
   IP multicast address taken from the network's infrastructure as a way
   of connecting together all the machines belonging to the same domain.
   All VMs within a domain can be reached by sending encapsulated
   packets to the domain's IP multicast address.  One issue with this
   approach, however, is that some existing implementations may be
   challenged in supporting large numbers of multicast groups.

   Another issue is whether fragmentation is needed.  Whenever tunneling
   is used, one faces the potential problem that the packet plus
   encapsulation overhead will exceed the MTU of the path to the egress
   router.  Fragmentation could be left to IP, could be done at the
   overlay level in a more optimized fashion or could be left out
   altogether, if it is believed that datacenter networks can be
   engineered to prevent MTU issues from arising.



Narten & Sridharan        Expires March 4, 2012                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   L3 Overlays for Network Virtualization   September 2011


   Related to fragmentation is the question of how best to handle Path
   MTU issues, should they occur.  Ideally, the original source of any
   packet (i.e, the sending VM) would be notified of the optimal MTU to
   use.  Path MTU problems occurring within an overlay network would
   result in ICMP MTU exceeded messages being sent back to the egress
   tunnel switch at the entry point of the overlay.  If the switch is
   embedded within a hypervisor, the hypervisor could notify the VM of a
   more appropriate MTU to use.  It may be appropriate to specify a set
   of best practices for implementers related to the handling of Path
   MTU issues.

   Both VXLAN and NVGRE assume that all machines belonging to the same
   domain are on the same IP subnet and reflect one L2 broadcast domain.
   This means that machines on different subnets cannot communicate
   directly, and must (conceptually) go through a router that is also
   part of the domain.  The result can be suboptimal forwarding,
   compared to the case where traffic is tunneled directly between the
   two machines.  Thus, another issue to consider is the handling of
   machines belonging to the same domain, but residing on different IP
   subnets.  While one solution may simply be to assign a /0 subnet mask
   to the entire domain (so that all machines are on the same subnet),
   this could require a configuration change on individual VM images,
   which may be undesirable in some deployments.

   Finally, successful deployment of an overlay approach will likely
   require appropriate Operations, Administration and Maintenance (OAM)
   facilities.


5.  Benefits of an Overlay Approach

   A key aspect of overlays is the decoupling of the "virtual" MAC and
   IP addresses used by VMs from the physical network infrastructure and
   the infrastructure IP addresses used by the datacenter.  If a VM
   changes location, the switches at the edge of the overlay simply
   update their mapping tables to reflect the new location of the VM
   within the data center's infrastructure space.  Because IP is used, a
   VM can now be located anywhere in the data center without regards to
   traditional constraints implied by L2 properties such as VLAN
   numbering, or the span of an L2 broadcast domain scoped to a single
   pod or access switch.

   Multitenancy is supported by isolating the traffic of one domain from
   traffic of another.  Traffic from one domain cannot be delivered to
   another domain without (conceptually) exiting the domain and entering
   the other domain.  Likewise, external communications (from a VM
   within a domain to a machine outside a domain) is handled by having
   an ingress switch forward traffic to an external router, where an



Narten & Sridharan        Expires March 4, 2012                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft   L3 Overlays for Network Virtualization   September 2011


   egress switch decapsulates a tunneled packet and delivers it to the
   router for normal processing.  This router is external to the
   overlay, and behaves much like existing external facing routers in
   datacenters today.

   The use of a large (e.g., 24-bit) domain identifiers would allow 16
   million distinct domains within a single datacenter, eliminating
   current VLAN size limitations.

   Using an overlay that sits above IP allows for the leveraging of the
   full range of IP technologies, including quality-of-service (QoS) and
   Equal Cost Multipath (ECMP) routing for load balancing across
   multiple links.

   Overlays are designed to handle the common case of a set of VMs
   placed within a single L2 broadcast domain.  Such configurations
   include VMs placed within a single VLAN or IP subnet.  All the VMs
   would be placed into a common overlay domain.


6.  Related Work

6.1.  ARMD

   ARMD is chartered to look at data center scaling issues with a focus
   on address resolution.  ARMD is currently chartered to develop a
   problem statement and is not currently developing solutions.  While
   an overlay-based approach may address some of the "pain points" that
   have been raised in ARMD (e.g., better support for multitenancy), an
   overlay approach may also push some of the L2 scaling concerns (e.g.,
   excessive flooding) to the IP level (flooding via IP multicast).
   Analysis will be needed to understand the scaling trade offs of an
   overlay based approach compared with existing approaches.  On the
   other hand, existing IP-based approaches such as proxy ARP may help
   mitigate some concerns.

6.2.  Trill

   Trill is an L2 based approach aimed at improving deficiencies and
   limitations with current Ethernet networks.  While Trill provides a
   good approach to improving current Ethernets, it is entirely L2
   based.  Trill was not originally designed to scale to the sizes that
   current data centers need to scale to.  [RFC6325] explicitly says:








Narten & Sridharan        Expires March 4, 2012                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft   L3 Overlays for Network Virtualization   September 2011


      The TRILL protocol, as specified herein, is designed to be a Local
      Area Network protocol and not designed with the goal of scaling
      beyond the size of existing bridged LANs.

   That said, approaches to extend Trill are currently under
   investigation [I-D.eastlake-trill-rbridge-fine-labeling]

6.3.  L2VPNs

   The IETF has specified a number of approaches for connecting L2
   domains together as part of the L2VPN Working Group.  That group,
   however is focused on Provider-provisioned L2 VPNs, where the service
   provider participates in management and provisioning of the VPN.  In
   addition, much of the target environment for such deployments
   involves carrying L2 traffic over WANs.  Overlay approaches are
   intended be used within data centers where the overlay network is
   managed by the datacenter operator, rather than by an outside party.
   While overlays can run across the Internet as well, they will extend
   well into the datacenter itself (e.g., up to and including
   hypervisors) and include large numbers of machines within the
   datacenter itself.

   Other L2VPN approaches, such as L2TP [RFC2661] require significant
   tunnel state at the encapsulating and decapsulating end points.
   Overlays require less tunnel state than other approaches, which is
   important to allow overlays to scale to hundreds of thousands of end
   points.  It is assumed that smaller switches (i.e., virtual switches
   in hypervisors or the physical switches to which VMs connect) will be
   part of the overlay network and be responsible for encapsulating and
   decapsulating packets.

6.4.  Proxy Mobile IP

   Proxy Mobile IP [RFC5213] [RFC5844] makes use of the GRE Key Field
   [RFC5845] [RFC6245], but not in a way that supports multitenancy.

6.4.1.  LISP

   [Placeholder for LISP]


7.  Further Work

   It is believed that overlay-based approaches may be able to reduce
   the overall amount of flooding and other multicast and broadcast
   related traffic (e.g, ARP and ND) currently experienced within
   current datacenters with a large flat L2 network.  Further analysis
   is needed to characterize expected improvements.



Narten & Sridharan        Expires March 4, 2012                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft   L3 Overlays for Network Virtualization   September 2011


8.  Summary

   This document has argued that network virtualization using L3
   overlays addresses a number of issues being faced as data centers
   scale in size.  In addition, careful consideration of a number of
   issues would lead to the development of interoperable implementation
   of virtualization overlays.


9.  Acknowledgments

   This document incorporates significant amounts of text from
   [I-D.mahalingam-dutt-dcops-vxlan].  Specifically, much of Section 2
   is incorporated verbatim from Section 3 of
   [I-D.mahalingam-dutt-dcops-vxlan].  The authors of that document
   include Mallik Mahalingam (VMware), Dinesh G. Dutt (Cisco), Kenneth
   Duda (Arista Networks), Puneet Agarwal (Broadcom), Lawrence Kreeger
   (Cisco), T. Sridhar (VMware), Mike Bursell (Citrix), and Chris Wright
   (Red Hat).

   Additional text in Section 2 was taken from
   [I-D.sridharan-virtualization-nvgre].  The authors of that document
   include Murari Sridharan (Microsoft), Kenneth Duda (Arista Networks),
   Ilango Ganga (Intel), Albert Greenberg (Microsoft), Geng Lin (Dell),
   Mark Pearson (Hewlett-Packard), Patricia Thaler (Broadcom), Chait
   Tumuluri (Emulex), Narasimhan Venkataramiah (Microsoft) and Yu-Shun
   Wang (Microsoft).

   Helpful comments and improvements to this document have come from
   Dinesh Dutt, Ariel Hendel, Vinit Jain and Larry Kreeger.


10.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


11.  Security Considerations

   TBD


12.  Informative References

   [I-D.eastlake-trill-rbridge-fine-labeling]
              Eastlake, D., Zhang, M., Agarwal, P., Dutt, D., and R.
              Perlman, "RBridges: Fine-Grained Labeling",
              draft-eastlake-trill-rbridge-fine-labeling-01 (work in



Narten & Sridharan        Expires March 4, 2012                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft   L3 Overlays for Network Virtualization   September 2011


              progress), July 2011.

   [I-D.hasmit-otv]
              Grover, H., Rao, D., Farinacci, D., and V. Moreno,
              "Overlay Transport Virtualization", draft-hasmit-otv-03
              (work in progress), July 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-6man-udpzero]
              Fairhurst, G. and M. Westerlund, "IPv6 UDP Checksum
              Considerations", draft-ietf-6man-udpzero-03 (work in
              progress), April 2011.

   [I-D.mahalingam-dutt-dcops-vxlan]
              Mahalingam, M., Dutt, D., Duda, K., Agarwal, P., Kreeger,
              L., Sridhar, T., Bursell, M., and C. Wright, "VXLAN: A
              Framework for Overlaying Virtualized Layer 2 Networks over
              Layer 3 Networks", draft-mahalingam-dutt-dcops-vxlan-00
              (work in progress), August 2011.

   [I-D.sridharan-virtualization-nvgre]
              Sridharan, M., Duda, K., Ganga, I., Greenberg, A., Lin,
              G., Pearson, M., Thaler, P., Tumuluri, C., Venkataramaiah,
              N., and Y. Wang, "NVGRE: Network Virtualization using
              Generic Routing Encapsulation",
              draft-sridharan-virtualization-nvgre-00 (work in
              progress), September 2011.

   [RFC2661]  Townsley, W., Valencia, A., Rubens, A., Pall, G., Zorn,
              G., and B. Palter, "Layer Two Tunneling Protocol "L2TP"",
              RFC 2661, August 1999.

   [RFC2784]  Farinacci, D., Li, T., Hanks, S., Meyer, D., and P.
              Traina, "Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE)", RFC 2784,
              March 2000.

   [RFC2890]  Dommety, G., "Key and Sequence Number Extensions to GRE",
              RFC 2890, September 2000.

   [RFC5213]  Gundavelli, S., Leung, K., Devarapalli, V., Chowdhury, K.,
              and B. Patil, "Proxy Mobile IPv6", RFC 5213, August 2008.

   [RFC5844]  Wakikawa, R. and S. Gundavelli, "IPv4 Support for Proxy
              Mobile IPv6", RFC 5844, May 2010.

   [RFC5845]  Muhanna, A., Khalil, M., Gundavelli, S., and K. Leung,
              "Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE) Key Option for Proxy
              Mobile IPv6", RFC 5845, June 2010.




Narten & Sridharan        Expires March 4, 2012                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft   L3 Overlays for Network Virtualization   September 2011


   [RFC6245]  Yegani, P., Leung, K., Lior, A., Chowdhury, K., and J.
              Navali, "Generic Routing Encapsulation (GRE) Key Extension
              for Mobile IPv4", RFC 6245, May 2011.

   [RFC6325]  Perlman, R., Eastlake, D., Dutt, D., Gai, S., and A.
              Ghanwani, "Routing Bridges (RBridges): Base Protocol
              Specification", RFC 6325, July 2011.


Authors' Addresses

   Thomas Narten (editor)
   IBM

   Email: narten@us.ibm.com


   Murari Sridharan
   Microsoft

   Email: muraris@microsoft.com






























Narten & Sridharan        Expires March 4, 2012                [Page 14]

