


MMUSIC                                                         J. Lennox
Internet-Draft                                                     Vidyo
Intended status: Standards Track                        October 19, 2009
Expires: April 22, 2010


   Encryption of Header Extensions in the Secure  Real-Time Transport
                            Protocol (SRTP)
          draft-lennox-avt-srtp-encrypted-extension-headers-00

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 22, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   The Secure Real-Time Transport Protocol (SRTP) provides
   authentication, but not encryption, of the headers of Real-Time



Lennox                   Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Encrypted SRTP Header Extensions        October 2009


   Transport Protocol (RTP) packets.  However, RTP header extensions may
   carry sensitive information for which participants in multimedia want
   confidentiality.  This document provides a mechanism, extending the
   mechanisms of SRTP, to selectively encrypt RTP header extensions in
   SRTP.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Encryption Mechanism  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   4.  Signaling (Setup) Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Appendix A.  Test Vectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7































Lennox                   Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Encrypted SRTP Header Extensions        October 2009


1.  Introduction

   The Secure Real-Time Transport Protocol [RFC3711] specification
   provides confidentiality, message authentication, and replay
   protection for multimedia payloads sent using of the Real-Time
   Protocol (RTP) [RFC3550].  However, in order to preserve RTP header
   compression efficiency, SRTP provides only authentication and replay
   protection for the headers of RTP packets, not confidentiality.

   For the standard portions of an RTP header, this does not normally
   present a problem, as the information carried in an RTP header does
   not provide much information beyond that which an attacker could
   infer by observing the size and timing of RTP packets.  Thus, there
   is little need for confidentiality of the header information.

   However, this is not necessarily true for information carried in RTP
   header extensions.  A number of recent proposals for header
   extensions using the General Mechanism for RTP Header Extensions
   [RFC5285] carry information for which confidentiality could be
   desired or essential.  Notably, two recent drafts
   ([I-D.lennox-avt-rtp-audio-level-exthdr] and [I-D.ivov-avt-slic])
   carry information about per-packet sound levels of the media data
   carried in the RTP payload, and exposing this to an eavesdropper may
   be unacceptable in many circumstances.

   This document, therefore, defines a mechanism by which encryption can
   be applied to RTP header extensions when they are transported using
   SRTP.  As an RTP sender may wish some extension information to be
   sent in the clear (for example, it may be useful for a network
   monitoring device to be aware of RTP transmission time offsets
   [RFC5450]), this mechanism can be selectively applied to a subset of
   the header extension elements carried in an SRTP packet.


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119] and
   indicate requirement levels for compliant implementations.


3.  Encryption Mechanism

   Encrypted header extension elements are carried in the same manner as
   non-encrypted header extension elements, as defined by [RFC5285].
   The (one- or two-byte) header of the extension elements is not
   encrypted, nor is any padding.  If multiple different header



Lennox                   Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Encrypted SRTP Header Extensions        October 2009


   extension elements are being encrypted, they have separate element
   identifier values, just as they would if they were not encrypted;
   similarly, encrypted and non-encrypted header extension elements have
   separate identifier values.

   To encrypt (or decrypt) an encrypted extension header, an SRTP
   participant first generates a keystream for the SRTP extension
   header.  This keystream is generated in the same manner as the
   encryption keystream for the corersponding SRTP payload, except the
   the SRTP encryption and salting keys k_e and k_s are replaced by the
   keys k_he and k_hs, respectively.  The keys k_he and k_hs are
   computed in the same manner as k_e and k_s, except that the <label>
   values used are 0x06 for k_he and and 0x07 for k_hs.  (Note that
   since RTP headers, including extension headers, are authenticated in
   SRTP, no new authentication key is needed for extension headers.

   The SRTP participant then computes an encryption mask for the header
   extension, identifying the portions of the header extension that are,
   or are to be, encrypted.  This encryption mask corresponds to the
   payloads of those header extension elements that are encrypted.  It
   does not include any non-encrypted header extension elements, any
   extension element headers, or any padding octets.

   For those octets indicated in the encryption mask, the SRTP
   participant bitwise exclusive-ors the header extension with the
   keystream.  Those octets not indicated in the encryption mask are
   left unmodified.

   The SRTP authentication tag is computed across the encrypted header
   extension, i.e., the data that is actually transmitted on the wire.
   Thus, header extension encryption MUST be done before the
   authentication tag is computed, and authentication tag validation
   MUST be done on the encrypted header extensions.  For receivers,
   header extension decryption SHOULD be done only after the receiver
   has validated the packet's message authentication tag.


4.  Signaling (Setup) Information

   Encrypted header extension elements are signaled in the SDP extmap
   attribute, using the URI "urn:ietf:params:rtp-hdrext:encrypt",
   followed by the URI of the header extension element being encrypted
   as well as any extensionattributes that extension normally takes.
   Thus, for example, to signal an SRTP session using encrypted SMPTE
   timecodes [RFC5484], while simultaneously signaling plaintext
   transmission time offsets [RFC5450], an SDP document could contain
   (linebreaks added for formatting):




Lennox                   Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Encrypted SRTP Header Extensions        October 2009


   m=audio 49170 RTP/SAVP 0
   a=crypto:1 AES_CM_128_HMAC_SHA1_32 \
     inline:NzB4d1BINUAvLEw6UzF3WSJ+PSdFcGdUJShpX1Zj|2^20|1:32
   a=extmap:1 urn:ietf:params:rtp-hdrext:encrypt \
       urn:ietf:params:rtp-hdrext:smpte-tc 25@600/24
   a=extmap:2 urn:ietf:params:rtp-hdrext:toffset


                                 Figure 1

   This example uses SDP Security Descriptions [RFC4568] for SRTP
   keying, but this is merely for illustration; any SRTP keying
   mechanism to establish session keys will work.


5.  Security Considerations

   The security properties of the mechanism in this document appear to
   be equivalent to those for SRTP payloads.

   The mechanism defined in this document does not provide
   confidentiality about which header extension elements are used for a
   given SRTP packet, only for the content of those header extension
   elements.  This appears to be in the spirit of SRTP itself, which
   does not encrypt RTP headers.  If this is a concern, an alternate
   mechanism would be needed to provide confidentiality.

   This document does not specify the circumstances in which extension
   header encryption should be used.  Documents defining specific
   extension header elements should provide guidance on when encryption
   is appropriate for these elements.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document defines a new extension URI to the RTP Compact Header
   Extensions subregistry of the Real-Time Transport Protocol (RTP)
   Parameters registry, according to the following data:

   Extension URI:  urn:ietf:params:rtp-hdrext:encrypt
   Description:  Encrypted extension header element
   Contact:  jonathan@vidyo.com
   Reference:  RFC XXXX

   (Note to the RFC-Editor: please replace "XXXX" with the number of
   this document prior to publication as an RFC.)





Lennox                   Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Encrypted SRTP Header Extensions        October 2009


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3550]  Schulzrinne, H., Casner, S., Frederick, R., and V.
              Jacobson, "RTP: A Transport Protocol for Real-Time
              Applications", STD 64, RFC 3550, July 2003.

   [RFC3711]  Baugher, M., McGrew, D., Naslund, M., Carrara, E., and K.
              Norrman, "The Secure Real-time Transport Protocol (SRTP)",
              RFC 3711, March 2004.

   [RFC5285]  Singer, D. and H. Desineni, "A General Mechanism for RTP
              Header Extensions", RFC 5285, July 2008.

7.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ivov-avt-slic]
              Ivov, E. and E. Marocco, "A Real-Time Transport Protocol
              (RTP) Extension Header for Mixer-to- client  Audio Level
              Indication", draft-ivov-avt-slic-01 (work in progress),
              October 2009.

   [I-D.lennox-avt-rtp-audio-level-exthdr]
              Lennox, J., "A Real-Time Transport Protocol (RTP)
              Extension Header for Audio Level  Indication",
              draft-lennox-avt-rtp-audio-level-exthdr-00 (work in
              progress), June 2009.

   [RFC4568]  Andreasen, F., Baugher, M., and D. Wing, "Session
              Description Protocol (SDP) Security Descriptions for Media
              Streams", RFC 4568, July 2006.

   [RFC5450]  Singer, D. and H. Desineni, "Transmission Time Offsets in
              RTP Streams", RFC 5450, March 2009.

   [RFC5484]  Singer, D., "Associating Time-Codes with RTP Streams",
              RFC 5484, March 2009.


Appendix A.  Test Vectors

   TODO





Lennox                   Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Encrypted SRTP Header Extensions        October 2009


Author's Address

   Jonathan Lennox
   Vidyo, Inc.
   433 Hackensack Avenue
   Sixth Floor
   Hackensack, NJ  07601
   US

   Email: jonathan@vidyo.com









































Lennox                   Expires April 22, 2010                 [Page 7]

