DNS Extensions Working Group 								Cindy WANG
Internet Draft		Jian JIN
Intended status: Standard Track		Feng HAN
		Xiaodong LEE
		CNNIC 
Expires: August 7, 2010		February 8, 2010

 
	A mechanism for synchronization across name servers on zone creation
		draft-ietf-dnsext-newzone-notify-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 7, 2010.



WANG et al	Expires August 7, 2010	[Page 1]

Internet-Draft	DNS draft-ietf-dnsext-newzone-notify-00.txt February 2010

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.


Abstract

This memo describes the NEWZONE_NOTIFY opcode for DNS, by which a 
primary master server advises a set of slave servers that there is a 
zone has been created and that a query should be initiated to 
discover the new zone data.

This draft also specifies a mechanism for the slave servers to 
achieve authenticated synchronization of zone data as well as zone 
synchronization information with the primary when a zone is created 
on the primary. 


Table of Contents


1. Introduction................................................4


WANG et al	Expires August 7, 2010	[Page 2]

Internet-Draft	DNS draft-ietf-dnsext-newzone-notify-00.txt February 2010


2. Conventions used in this document...........................5
3. Definitions and Invariants..................................5
4. NEWZONE_NOTIFY message......................................6
5. Automating the synchronization on zone creation across multiple 
name servers...................................................7
6. Security Considerations.....................................9
7. References..................................................9



1. Introduction


For large and busy domain name registrars, the zone creation 
operations resulted from frequent domain name registrations are 
almost daily routines. However, for these operations there are no 
technical specifications for automatic zone synchronization across 
multiple name servers. Moreover, the manual operations turn into 
heavy burden for administrators when there is large number of name 
servers authoritative for the zones.

The major obstacle to the synchronization in the above situation is 
that, specified by the original design of DNS, when authority zones 
are created, they must be declared to have one or more authoritative 
name servers, usually consisting of one primary name server and 
several secondary name servers. The configuration of the 
synchronization relationships among the name servers depends upon out 
of band information and manual processes, which are normally 
specified with the zone creation.

This draft specifies a mechanism for the slave servers to achieve 
authenticated synchronization of both zone data and dependency 
configuration with the master servers when a zone is created. 


WANG et al	Expires August 7, 2010	[Page 3]

Internet-Draft	DNS draft-ietf-dnsext-newzone-notify-00.txt February 2010


2. Conventions used in this document


The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [1].


3. Definitions and Invariants

The following definitions are used in this document, and intended to 
be consistent with [RFC1996] and [RFC2136]:

o	Slave: an authoritative server which uses zone transfer to 
retrieve the zone.  All slave servers are named in the NS RRs 
for the zone.

o	Master: an authoritative server configured to be the source of 
zone transfer for one or more slave servers.

o	Primary Master: the master server at the root of the zone 
replication dependency graph. The primary master is named in 
the zone's SOA MNAME field and optionally by an NS RR. There is 
by definition only one primary master server per zone and the 
source of zone creation for one or more slave servers.

o	Notify Set: set of servers to be notified of changes to some 
new zone.  Default is all servers named in the NS RRset of the 
zone, except for any server also named in the SOA MNAME. Some 
implementations will permit the name server administrator to 
override this set or add elements to it (such as, for example, 
the "also-notify" implemented in BIND [DNS_BIND]).
o	Trusted-Master Set: set of servers whose notification could be 
trusted by the slave and the set is specified out-of-bind. 

o	Dependency graph: organization of the zone's name servers, such 
that there is a primary master, and all other servers must 
request zone replication either from the primary master or from 
some slave which is also a master. NO loops are permitted in 
the dependency graph. The dependency graph is created with the 
zone by the administrator on the primary master. For example, 
the set of servers for a zone is {p, s1, s2, s3, s4, s5, s6, 
s7}, where p is the address of the primary and {s1... s7} 
addresses of the slaves. The dependency graph could be defined 
as {{p->s1}, {p->s2}, {p->s3}, {s1->s2}, {s2->s3}, {s2->s4}, 
{s2->s5}, {s3->s6}, {s3->s7}}, where "->" denotes "is the 
master of". An example of the "master of" relationship would 
look like, {1.2.3.4->5.6.7.8}.


WANG et al	Expires August 7, 2010	[Page 4]

Internet-Draft	DNS draft-ietf-dnsext-newzone-notify-00.txt February 2010


4. NEWZONE_NOTIFY message

4.1. When a primary master has a new zone, the master may send the 
created zone's name, class, type, and the name of the master from 
which the slave to request the zone data, to each known slave 
server using a protocol based on the NEWZONE_NOTIFY opcode.

4.2. NEWZONE_NOTIFY employs the DNS Message Format [RFC 1034], 
although it uses only a subset of the available fields.  Fields 
not otherwise described herein are to be filled with binary zero 
(0).

4.3. NEWZONE_NOTIFY is similar to QUERY in that it has a request 
message with the header QR flag "clear" and a response message 
with QR "set".  The response message contains no useful 
information, but its reception by the master is an indication that 
the slave has received the NEWZONE_NOTIFY and that the master can 
remove the slave from any retry queue for this NEWZONE_NOTIFY 
event.

4.4. TSIG MUST be enabled between parties exchanging the 
NEWZONE_NOTIFY messages.

4.5. The NEWZONE_NOTIFY request has the following characteristics:
Header:

      query ID:   (new)
      opcode:     NEWZONE_NOTIFY  (5)
      resp:       NOERROR
      flags:      AA
      qdcount:    1
      ancount:	  1
Question Section:
      qname:      (zone name)
      qclass:     (zone class)
      qtype:      * (matches all RR types)
Answer Section:
	Name of one of the masters m which satisfies m->s, where s is 
the notified slave.

The defined NEWZONE_NOTIFY event in this situation is that a zone has 


WANG et al	Expires August 7, 2010	[Page 5]

Internet-Draft	DNS draft-ietf-dnsext-newzone-notify-00.txt February 2010


been created (QTYPE=*) on the primary master server.

5. Automating the synchronization on zone creation across multiple 
name servers

5.1. Zone created on the primary master server

1.	The primary master should send a NEWZONE_NOTIFY request to all 
the servers in the dependency graph except for itself. 

2.	The notifying order should be decided by the distances (number 
of other masters in between) of the slaves to the primary 
master. A slave CANNOT be notified until at least one of its 
masters responds back to the primary master with success.

3.	For slaves with more than one master, the primary master MUST 
send multiple notification messages, one for each master. 

5.2. Slave Receives a NEWZONE_NOTIFY Request from the Primary Master
When a slave server receives a NEWZONE_NOTIFY request enclosing the 
given QNAME, with QTYPE=* and QR=0, first of all, it MUST check the 
authentication of the message by examining,

1.	The notifying IP must be present in the slave's 'Trusted-Master 
Set'; (protecting the slave from being flooded by malicious 
messages.)

2.	By requesting the SOA and NS record sets for the created zone 
from the notifying master,

3.	The notifying master MUST carry a SOA record for the notified 
zone;

4.	The notifying master MUST either appear in the MNAME of the SOA 
record or goes with one name in the NS record-set for the 
created zone;

5.	The set of NS records for the created zone, as retrieved by the 
slave from the notifying master, MUST include the name that 
goes with the IP address of the notified master.

If the notification is justified by all the above conditions, the 
slave should behave as though the zone given in the QNAME had been 
created on the primary master. It should respond to the 
NEWZONE_NOTIFY message with the following actions,


WANG et al	Expires August 7, 2010	[Page 6]

Internet-Draft	DNS draft-ietf-dnsext-newzone-notify-00.txt February 2010


1.	Firstly, it requests the SOA record of the named zone locally 
to determine whether the zone exists or not.

2.	If the zone exists, then the synchronization has been done from 
other master of the slave; otherwise, it is a zone creation 
notification and a zone transfer (AXFR) [AXFR_clarify] should 
be initiated to the master specified in the answer section of 
the NEWZONE_NOTIFY message from the primary master. 

3.	In both cases, the master appearing in the answer section is 
configured locally to be one of the masters of the slave.

4.	Finally, the updates are loaded into memory and the master 
specified in the answer section of the NEWZONE_NOTIFY message 
is added to the master list of the slave.

5.	Whether the AXFR succeeds or not, the slave will also send a 
NEWZONE_NOTIFY response back to the NEWZONE_NOTIFY request's 
source, with the following characteristics:

Header:
      query ID:  (same)
      opcode:    NEWZONE_NOTIFY  (5)
      RCODE:     NOERROR (AXFR succeeds) or Server failure (AXFR 
fails)
      flags:     OR AA
      qdcount:   1
Question Section:
      qname:     (zone name)
      qclass:    (zone class)
      qtype:     * (matches all RR types)
Answer Section: 
 MUST be EMPTY

5.3. Primary Master Receives a NEWZONE_NOTIFY Response from Slave

1.	If a NEWZONE_NOTIFY response from a slave with RCODE= Server 
failure arrives, the primary master keeps the NEWZONE_NOTIFY 
query in the retry queue.



WANG et al	Expires August 7, 2010	[Page 7]

Internet-Draft	DNS draft-ietf-dnsext-newzone-notify-00.txt February 2010



2.	Otherwise, if the primary master server receives a 
NEWZONE_NOTIFY response from a slave with RCODE= NOERROR, it 
initiates the notification process to all the slaves of that 
slave. Next it deletes the successful query from the retry 
queue, thus completing the notification process of the zone 
creation change to the notifying slave. 

6. Security Considerations

This document is believed to introduce no additional security 
problems to the current DNS protocol.

7. References

7.1. Normative References

[RFC1034] Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - concepts and 
facilities", STD 13, RFC 1034, November 1987.

[RFC1035] Mockapetris, P., "Domain Names - Implementation and 
Specifications", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987.

[RFC1996] Vixie, P., "A Mechanism for Prompt Notification of Zone 
Changes (DNS NOTIFY)", RFC 1996, August 1996.

[RFC2136] Vixie, P., Ed., Thomson, S., Rekhter, Y., and J. Bound, 
"Dynamic Updates in the Domain Name System (DNS UPDATE)", 
RFC 2136, April 1997.

[RFC2845]  Vixie, P., Gudmundsson, O., Eastlake, D. and Wellington, 
B., "Secret Key Transaction Authentication for DNS (TSIG) 
", RFC 2845, May 2000.

7.2. Informative References

[AXFR_clarify]	DNS Zone Transfer Protocol (AXFR). draft-ietf-
dnsext-axfr-clarify-12.

[DNS_BIND] DNS and BIND, 5th Edition.

[PDNS] PowerDNS manual. Chapter 13. Master/Slave operation & 
replication. 






WANG et al	Expires August 7, 2010	[Page 8]

Internet-Draft	DNS draft-ietf-dnsext-newzone-notify-00.txt February 2010





Authors' Addresses
Cindy WANG
CNNIC
4, South 4th Street, Zhongguancun
Beijing 100190
P.R. China
Email: wangxin@cnnic.cn
	
Jian Jin
CNNIC
4, South 4th Street, Zhongguancun
Beijing 100190
P.R. China
Email: jinjian@cnnic.cn

Feng Han
CNNIC
4, South 4th Street, Zhongguancun
Beijing 100190
P.R. China
Email: hanfeng@cnnic.cn

Xiaodong LEE
CNNIC
4, South 4th Street, Zhongguancun
Beijing 100190
P.R. China
Email: lee@cnnic.cn




























WANG et al	Expires August 7, 2010	[Page 9]