A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3090

        Title:      DNS Security Extension Clarification on Zone
                    Status 
        Author(s):  E. Lewis
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       March 2001
        Mailbox:    lewis@tislabs.com
        Pages:      11
        Characters: 24166
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-dnsext-zone-status-05.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3090.txt


The definition of a secured zone is presented, clarifying and updating
sections of RFC 2535.  RFC 2535 defines a zone to be secured based on
a per algorithm basis, e.g., a zone can be secured with RSA keys, and
not secured with DSA keys.  This document changes this to define a
zone to be secured or not secured regardless of the key algorithm used
(or not used).  To further simplify the determination of a zone's
status, "experimentally secure" status is deprecated. 

This document is a product of the DNS Extensions Working Group of the
IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.


This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

