



perpass non-WG                                               B. Trammell
Internet-Draft                                                ETH Zurich
Intended status: Informational                        September 04, 2013
Expires: March 08, 2014


  The Perfect Passive Adversary: A Threat Model for the Evaluation of
                 Protocols under Pervasive Surveillance
                   draft-trammell-perpass-ppa-00.txt

Abstract

   This document elaborates a threat model for the Perfect Passive
   Adversary (PPA): an adversary with an interest in eavesdropping that
   can passively observe network traffic at every layer at every point
   in the network between the endpoints.  It is intended to demonstrate
   to protocol designers and implementors the observability and
   inferability of information and metainformation transported over
   their respective protocols, to assist in the evaluation of the
   performance of these protocols and the effectiveness of their
   protection mechanisms under pervasive passive surveillance.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 08, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents



Trammell                 Expires March 08, 2014                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Perfect Passive Adversary         September 2013


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Open Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   3.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  The Perfect Passive Adversary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   5.  Threat analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     5.1.  Information subject to direct observation . . . . . . . .   5
     5.2.  Metainformation useful for inference  . . . . . . . . . .   5
   6.  Guidelines for protocol evaluation  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   7.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     8.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6

1.  Open Issues

   1.  Lots of things need citations that don't have them yet.

   2.  Threat analysis and protocol design guidelines need to be
       completed, which will require them to be started too.

2.  Introduction

   Surveillance is defined in [RFC6973], Section 5.1.1, as "the
   observation or monitoring of an individual's communications or
   activities".  Pervasive passive surveillance is the practice of
   surveillance at widespread observation points, without any
   modification of network traffic, and without any particular
   surveillance target in mind.  Pervasive passive surveillance allows
   subsequent analysis and inference to be applied to the collected data
   to achieve surveillance aims on a target to be identified later, or
   to analyze general communications patterns and/or behaviors without a
   specified target individual or group.

   An analysis of the costs and benefits of pervasive passive
   surveillance is explicitly out of scope of this work; we presume a
   priori that communications systems should aim to provide appropriate
   privacy guarantees to their users, and that such pervasive
   surveillance is therefore a bad thing.  Therefore, susceptibility to
   pervasive surveillance should avoided as a design goal in protocol



Trammell                 Expires March 08, 2014                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Perfect Passive Adversary         September 2013


   design.  From these assumptions we take the very act of pervasive
   surveillance to be adversarial by definition.

   This document outlines a threat model for an entity performing
   pervasive passive surveillance, termed the Perfect Passive Adversary
   (PPA), and explores how to apply this model to the evaluation of
   protocols.  As the primary threat posed by pervasive surveillance is
   a threat to the privacy of the parties to a given communication, this
   document is heavily based on [RFC6973].

3.  Terminology

   The terms Anonymity, Anonymity Set, Anonymous, Attacker,
   Eavesdropper, Fingerprint, Fingerprinting, Identifier, Identity,
   Individual, Initiator, Intermediary, Observer, Pseudonym,
   Pseudonymity, Pseudonymous, Recipient, and Traffic Analysis are used
   in this document as defined by Section 3, Terminology, of [RFC6973].
   In addition, this document defines the following terms:

   Observation:   Information collected directly from communications by
      an eavesdropper or observer.  For example, the knowledge that
      <alice@example.com> sent a message to <bob@example.com> via SMTP
      taken from the headers of an observed SMTP message would be an
      observation.

   Inference:   Information extracted from analysis of information
      collected directly from communications by an eavesdropper or
      observer.  For example, the knowledge that a given web page was
      accessed by a given IP address, by comparing the size in octets of
      measured network flow records to fingerprints derived from known
      sizes of linked resources on the web servers involved would be an
      inference.

4.  The Perfect Passive Adversary

















Trammell                 Expires March 08, 2014                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Perfect Passive Adversary         September 2013


   The perfect passive adversary (PPA) is an eavesdropper that can
   potentially observe every packet of all communications at any or
   every hop in a network path between the outward-facing network
   interface of the last trusted machine in the initiator's
   administrative domain and the recipient, but can take no other action
   with respect to these communications.  Limiting the adversary to
   being completely passive may under-represent the threat to
   communications privacy posed especially by well-resourced
   adversaries, but represents well the maximum capability of a single
   entity whose surveillance is undetectable without physically securing
   the entire network path.  We also assume that the PPA does not have
   unlimited resources, i.e., that it will attempt to eavesdrop at the
   most efficient observation point available to it, and will collect as
   little raw data as necessary to support its aims.

   We explicitly assume the PPA does not have the ability to compromise
   trusted systems at either the initiator or a recipient of a
   communication.  Indeed, if the adversary is cooperating with one of
   the communications endpoints, there is no guidance to give to
   protocol designers that would improve the privacy and security of the
   individual at the other endpoint: the compromise is then truly out of
   the scope of the communication enabled by the protocol.

   We further assume the PPA does not have priviliged information
   allowing the reversal of encryption, e.g. compromised key material or
   knowledge of weaknesses in the design or implementation of
   cryptographic algorithms at the initiator, recipient, and/or
   intermediaries.  While these risks do exist in the real world, the
   threat model is simplified if we presume that a given cryptographic
   protection for a protocol works as advertised.

   The tools available to the PPA are therefore direct observation and
   inference.  Direct observation involves taking information directly
   from eavesdropped communications - e.g., URLs identifying content or
   email addresses identifying individuals from application-layer
   headers.  Inference, on the other involves analyzing eavesdropped
   information to derive new information from it; e.g., searching for
   application or behavioral fingerprints in observed traffic to derive
   information about the observed individual from them, in absence of
   directly-observed sources of the same information.

5.  Threat analysis

   On initial examination, the PPA would appear to be trivially
   impossible to defend against.  If the PPA has access to every byte of
   every packet of a communication, then full application payload and
   content is available.  Guidance to protocol designers to provide
   cryptographic protection of confidentiality in their protocols (e.g.,



Trammell                 Expires March 08, 2014                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Perfect Passive Adversary         September 2013


   through the use of TLS [RFC5246] at the transport layer and S/MIME
   [RFC3851] end-to-end) improves this situation somewhat, but metadata
   such as source and destination IP addresses and ports are still
   available to allow correlation and association of communications.
   Protocols that route messages based on recipient identifier or
   pseudonym, such as SMTP [RFC2821] and XMPP [RFC6120], still require
   intermediate systems to handle these.  If each hop of the
   communication is not secured, these identifiers may be available to
   an eavesdropper.

   Assuming that the PPA's resources are not unlimited allows us to back
   away from this worst-case scenario.  Storing full packet information
   for a fully-loaded 10 Gigabit Ethernet link will fill one 4TB hard
   disk (the largest commodity hard disk available as of this writing)
   in less than an hour; storing network flow data from the same link,
   e.g. as IPFIX Files [RFC5655], requires on the order of 1/1000 the
   storage (i.e., 4GB an hour).  Flow-based surveillance approaches,
   which store only communications metadata, are therefore more scalable
   for pervasive surveillance, so it is worthwhile to analyze
   information which can be inferred from various network traffic
   capture and analysis techniques other than full packet capture.

   In the remainder of this analysis, we list kinds of information which
   can be directly observed and those which can be used for inference
   through e.g. fingerprinting.  The former group may seem somewhat
   obvious, but are included for completeness.

5.1.  Information subject to direct observation

   [EDITOR'S NOTE: list includes but not limited to communications
   content, application-layer identifiers, network- and transport-layer
   identifiers, association of DNS queries with subsequent usage of
   information in the answers.]

5.2.  Metainformation useful for inference

   [EDITOR'S NOTE: list includes but not limited to interpacket timing;
   packet sizes; flow packet and octet counts; presence of options which
   could lead to OS fingerprinting for deNATting, etc.]

6.  Guidelines for protocol evaluation

   [EDITOR'S NOTE: How to look at a protocol and evaluate the
   observability of the information it transports?]

   [EDITOR'S NOTE: General guidance: end-to-end encryption when
   possible.  Apply unlinked pseudonyms for message routing on envelopes
   around end-to-end encrypted content.]



Trammell                 Expires March 08, 2014                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Perfect Passive Adversary         September 2013


   [EDITOR'S NOTE: General guidance: Fingerprinting can rely on packet
   and flow size information; the inclusion of null information in
   packets, or grouping information into more/fewer packets can reduce
   this risk at the expense of usable bandwidth; though this is
   implementation guidance, protocols should make it possible do to
   dhis.  Similarly, fingerprinting can rely on inter-packet timing
   information: injecting delay into packet transmission can reduce this
   risk at the expense of latency.]

7.  Acknowledgments

   Thanks to Dilip Many, Daniel Borkmann, and Stephan Neuhaus, who
   contributed to an initial version of this work.

8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC6973]  Cooper, A., Tschofenig, H., Aboba, B., Peterson, J.,
              Morris, J., Hansen, M., and R. Smith, "Privacy
              Considerations for Internet Protocols", RFC 6973, July
              2013.

8.2.  Informative References

   [RFC2821]  Klensin, J., "Simple Mail Transfer Protocol", RFC 2821,
              April 2001.

   [RFC3851]  Ramsdell, B., "Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail
              Extensions (S/MIME) Version 3.1 Message Specification",
              RFC 3851, July 2004.

   [RFC5246]  Dierks, T. and E. Rescorla, "The Transport Layer Security
              (TLS) Protocol Version 1.2", RFC 5246, August 2008.

   [RFC5655]  Trammell, B., Boschi, E., Mark, L., Zseby, T., and A.
              Wagner, "Specification of the IP Flow Information Export
              (IPFIX) File Format", RFC 5655, October 2009.

   [RFC6120]  Saint-Andre, P., "Extensible Messaging and Presence
              Protocol (XMPP): Core", RFC 6120, March 2011.

Author's Address








Trammell                 Expires March 08, 2014                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Perfect Passive Adversary         September 2013


   Brian Trammell
   Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich
   Gloriastrasse 35
   8092 Zurich
   Switzerland

   Phone: +41 44 632 70 13
   Email: trammell@tik.ee.ethz.ch











































Trammell                 Expires March 08, 2014                 [Page 7]
