Mobility Extensions for IPv6 (MEXT)                      S. Koh, J. Kim
Internet Draft                           Kyungpook National University
Intended status: Informational                                H. Jung
Expires: September 2011                                          ETRI
                                                         March 7, 2011


      Extension of Proxy Mobile IPv6 for Distributed Mobility Control
                     draft-sjkoh-mext-pmip-dmc-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. This document may not be modified,
   and derivative works of it may not be created, and it may not be
   published except as an Internet-Draft.

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. This document may not be modified,
   and derivative works of it may not be created, except to publish it
   as an RFC and to translate it into languages other than English.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008. The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."




Koh, Kim & Jung        Expires September 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                PMIP-DMC                      March 2011


   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 7, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document.

Abstract

   Mobile cellular networks with hierarchical architecture are now
   changing to flat architecture due to ever-increasing mobile Internet
   traffics. Most of the existing mobility protocols are based on a
   centralized mobility anchor, by which all the control and data
   traffics are processed. In the flat network architecture, however,
   the centralized mobility scheme has some limitations, which include
   unwanted traffic flowing into core network, service degradation by a
   single point of failure, and increased operational costs, etc. This
   draft proposes some mobility schemes for distributed mobility
   control in the flat architecture of future network. Based on the
   well-known Proxy Mobile IPv6 (PMIP), we propose the three schemes of
   distributed mobility control: Signal-driven PMIP (S-PMIP), Data-
   driven Distributed PMIP (DD-PMIP), and Signal-driven Distributed
   PMIP (SD-PMIP). This draft proposes an extension of PMIP for
   distributed mobility control.


Koh, Kim & Jung        Expires September 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                PMIP-DMC                      March 2011


Table of Contents


   1. Introduction ................................................ 3
   2. Conventions used in this document                                            ............................ 4
   3. Overview of Distributed Mobility Control ..................... 5
   4. Distributed Mobility Control Schemes in the PMIP Networks                                                                   ..... 6
      4.1. Overview ............................................... 6
      4.2. Signal-driven PMIP (S-PMIP)                                           ............................. 7
      4.3. Data-driven Distributed PMIP (DD-PMIP) .................. 7
      4.4. Signal-driven Distributed PMIP (SD-PMIP) ................ 8
   5. Security Considerations                                  ...................................... 8
   6. IANA Considerations ......................................... 8
   7. Conclusions ................................................. 8
   8. References .................................................. 9
      8.1. Normative References                                    .................................... 9
      8.2. Informative References                                      .................................. 9
   9. Acknowledgments ............................................ 10

1. Introduction

   With emergence of new types of wireless/mobile networks and wide
   popularity of smart phones, the number of mobile Internet users has
   been rapidly increasing. It is reported that the number of mobile
   Internet users will be 1.6 billion in around 2014 and thus exceed
   the number of desktop users. This mobile-oriented trend inevitably
   tends to introduce a large amount of traffics into mobile Internet
   infrastructure.

   The cellular system is a typical infrastructure for mobile Internet,
   as shown in the SAE of 3GPP. The cellular network was originally
   designed as hierarchical architecture to support circuit-based voice
   traffics. However, an ever-increasing demand of mobile Internet
   traffics has enforced non-hierarchical or flat structure on mobile
   networks, so as to provide data services more cost-effectively. Now,
   the flat architecture is regarded as a promising technology for
   future mobile networks.

   Most of existing protocols for Internet mobility are based on the
   centralized approach, in which all the control and data traffics
   will be processed by a centralized mobility anchor, such as Home
   Agent (HA) of Mobile IP (MIP) [4] or Local Mobility Anchor (LMA) of
   Proxy MIP (PMIP) [5]. The centralized mobility anchor allows a
   mobile host to be reachable, when it is not connected to its home
   domain, by ensuring the forwarding of packets destined to or sent
   from the mobile device. In the flat architecture, however, such a
   centralized mobility scheme is vulnerable to some problems. First,


Koh, Kim & Jung        Expires September 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                PMIP-DMC                      March 2011


   the centralized anchor may induce unwanted traffic into the core
   network, which tends to give a big burden to mobile network
   operators in terms of operational costs. In addition, a single point
   of failure of the central anchor may affect overall data
   transmission and degradation of performance, which will increase the
   cost of network dimensioning and engineering.

   To overcome the limitations of centralized management, the IETF has
   recently discussed the distributed mobility management. The
   distributed mobility management can be divided into the partially
   distributed approach, in which only the data plane is distributed,
   and the fully distributed approach where both data plane and control
   plane are distributed. In the centralized management, the routing
   path through a centralized anchor tends to be longer, which results
   in non-optimal routes and performance degradation, whereas the route
   optimization will be intrinsically supported in the distributed
   management. Moreover, the distributed mobility management can reduce
   unnecessary traffics, if the two end hosts communicate directly each
   other, not relying on a centralized anchor. This will also be
   helpful to reduce the handover delay. Moreover, the centralized
   approach is vulnerable to a single point of failure, whereas the
   distributed approach will mitigate such problem to a local network.

   In this draft we discuss the distributed mobility control in the
   flat architecture of future network, which is a part of research on
   Mobile Oriented Future Internet (MOFI) supported by Korean
   government [8]. Based on the PMIP [5], we propose the three schemes
   of distributed mobility control: Signal-driven PMIP (S-PMIP), Data-
   driven Distributed PMIP (DD-PMIP), and Signal-driven Distributed
   PMIP (SD-PMIP). S-PMIP can be regarded as a partially distributed
   approach, whereas DD-PMIP and SD-PMIP correspond to the fully
   distributed schemes.

2. Conventions used in this document

   In examples, "C:" and "S:" indicate lines sent by the client and
   server respectively.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119].

   In this document, these words will appear with that interpretation
   only when in ALL CAPS. Lower case uses of these words are not to be
   interpreted as carrying RFC-2119 significance.




Koh, Kim & Jung        Expires September 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                PMIP-DMC                      March 2011


   In this document, the characters ">>" preceding an indented line(s)
   indicates a compliance requirement statement using the key words
   listed above. This convention aids reviewers in quickly identifying
   or finding the explicit compliance requirements of this RFC.

3. Overview of Distributed Mobility Control

   In centralized mobility control, the information of binding between
   Home address (HoA) and Care of Address (CoA) is kept at a central
   mobility anchor (e.g., HA or LMA), and the data packets destined to
   mobile nodes are routed via this anchor. In other words, such the
   mobility control systems are centralized in both data plane and
   control plane. Most of current mobile networks, such as UMTS, CDMA,
   and 3GPP SAE networks, are based on such the centralized approach.
   However, such the centralized approach has several limitations,
   which include degradation of mobility performance, worse scalability,
   costly maintenance and operations of the network, and vulnerability
   of a single point of failure or attack. Moreover, network operators
   tend to have a big concern due to a large amount of unwanted traffic
   flowing into their core network.

   To address these problems of centralized mobility management, the
   IETF recently began to discuss the distributed mobility control
   approaches. In the distributed mobility control, the mobility
   control functions are distributed to multiple locations in the
   network, so that a mobile node may be served by a nearby mobility
   agent. The distributed mobility control can be divided into the
   partially distributed approach, in which only data plane is
   distributed, and the fully distributed one where both data plane and
   control plane are distributed.

   In the partially distributed approach, the control plane is
   separated from the data plane, and only data plane will be
   distributed for route optimization. First, a mobile node (MN) is
   connected to a mobility agent (MA). Then, the MA binds the location
   of MN with the control function. If a correspondent node (CN) sends
   a data packet toward MN, the MA will find the location of MN by
   contacting with the control function, in which location query and
   query acknowledgement messages can be exchanged. Based on the
   obtained location information, the MA of CN can deliver the data
   packets directly to the MA of MN. Now, the data packet is forwarded
   to MN.

   In the fully distributed architecture, both control plane and data
   plane are distributed, which can further be classified into the
   data-driven multicast/broadcast scheme and the peer-to-peer search
   scheme.


Koh, Kim & Jung        Expires September 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                PMIP-DMC                      March 2011


   In the data-driven multicast/broadcast scheme, when a MN is attached
   to MA, no binding operation is performed. For data packets
   transmitted by CN, the MA of CN will deliver them all of the MAs by
   using multicast or broadcast in the domain. Then, the MA of MN will
   forward them to MN. This scheme does not use any binding process and
   searching (or query) procedure to find the MN. However, unnecessary
   data packets may be excessively generated in the domain, since the
   data packets will be delivered to all of MAs.

   In the peer-to-peer search scheme, just before transmission of data
   packets, a searching process will be activated among MAs in the
   domain to find the location of MN, which is described in Fig. 3.
   After network attachment, CN transmits a data packet to its MA. The
   MA of CN will find the location of MN by using an appropriate
   searching mechanism, such as the distributed hash table (DHT). Then,
   the MA of MN will respond to the MN of CN. Now, the MA of CN
   delivers the data packet to the MA of MN. The data packet will be
   forwarded to MN.

4. Distributed Mobility Control Schemes in the PMIP Networks

   It is noted that many of existing mobility protocols can be used to
   implement the distributed mobility control or a completely new
   protocol may be designed. In this draft, we will design the
   distributed mobility control schemes based on the PMIP, since it is
   the most promising protocol used in current mobile networks, as
   shown in the 3GPP/SAE and WiMAX specifications.

4.1. Overview

   In this section, we propose the three extensional schemes for
   distributed mobility control based on PMIP network: Signal-driven
   PMIPv6 (S-PMIP), Data-driven Distributed PMIPv6 (DD-PMIP), Signal-
   driven Distributed PMIPv6 (SD-PMIP).

   The existing PMIPv6 can be regarded as a centralized architecture,
   in which MAG performs the Proxy Binding Update (PBU) operation with
   LMA, and the data packets are first delivered to LMA and then
   forwarded to MN, without using any search (or query) mechanism.

   The proposed S-PMIPv6 is a partially distributed architecture in
   which the control plane is separated from the data plane. The PBU
   operation will be performed between MAG and LMA, as done in PMIP. In
   the packet delivery operation, however, the MAG of CN first finds
   the CoA of MN, just before data delivery, by contacting with LMA. To
   do this, the MAG of CN will transmit a newly defined Proxy Binding
   Query (PBQ) message to LMA, and the LMA will respond with a Proxy


Koh, Kim & Jung        Expires September 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                PMIP-DMC                      March 2011


   Query ACK (PQA) message to the MAG. In this sense, this scheme is
   named 'signal-driven' scheme. After that, the MAG of CN will deliver
   the data packet directly to the MAG of MN, and further to MN.

   The proposed DD-PMIP scheme is a fully distributed architecture,
   which is similar to the data-driven multicast/broadcast scheme
   described in Section 2. In this scheme, LMA is not used and the PBU
   operation is not performed. The MAG of CN will send a data packet to
   all of the MAGs by multicast in the domain, without using the PBQ
   operation. In this sense, this scheme is named 'signal-driven'
   scheme.

   Finally, the proposed SD-PMIPv6 is also a fully distributed
   architecture, which is similar to the peer-to-peer search scheme
   described in Section 2. No binding update operation is performed. In
   the data packet delivery, the MAG of CN will find the MAG of MN by
   using sending a PBQ message to all of the MAGs by multicast. The MAG
   of MN will respond with a PBA message. After that, the MAG of CN
   will deliver the data packet directly to the MAG of MN, further to
   MN.

   For signaling operation for location query in the S-PMIP and SD-PMIP
   schemes, we define the PBQ and PQA messages by adding the 'Q' flag
   bit into the existing PBU and Proxy Binding ACK (PBA) packets,
   respectively.

4.2. Signal-driven PMIP (S-PMIP)

   First, the MN setups a connection with the MAG and obtains its HoA
   (step 1). The MAG sends a PBU message to LMA to bind HoA and CoA of
   MN (step 2). On receiving the PBU request, the LMA will create the
   associated database entry, and send the PBA to the MAG (step 3). Now,
   CN sends a data packet to MN (step 4). Then, the MAG sends a PBQ
   message to LMA to find the CoA of MN (step 5). On the reception of
   PBQ, the LMA responds with a PQA message including the CoA of MN to
   the MAG of CN, after lookup of its database (step 6). During this
   process, the MAG may buffer the data packets received from the CN to
   prevent the packet losses. After establish the tunnel, the MAG sends
   the data packets buffered in the MAG first. After that, the MAG of
   CN sends the data packet to MAG of MN (step 7). Finally, the data
   packet is forwarded to MN (step 8).

4.3. Data-driven Distributed PMIP (DD-PMIP)

   The MN setups a connection with the MAG (step 1). When CN sends a
   data packet to MN (step 2), the corresponding MAG sends the data
   packet to all the MAGs in the PMIPv6 domain by multicast (step 3).


Koh, Kim & Jung        Expires September 2011                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                PMIP-DMC                      March 2011


   On receiving the data packet from MAG of CN, the MAG of MN will
   respond with a PQA message to the MAG of CN (step 4), which ensures
   that the further subsequent data packets of CN can be delivered to
   MAG of MN by unicast, without relying on multicast transmission. Now,
   the MAG of MN will deliver the data packet to MN (step 5).

4.4. Signal-driven Distributed PMIP (SD-PMIP)

   The MN setups a connection with the MAG (step 1). When CN sends a
   data packet to MN (step 2), the MAG of CN sends a PBQ message all
   the MAGs in the domain (step 3). Then, only the MAG of MN will
   respond with a PQA message to MAGH of CN (step 4). Now, the data
   packet will be delivered to MAG of MN (step 5), and further to MN
   (step 6).

5. Security Considerations

   TBD

6. IANA Considerations

   TBD

7. Conclusions

   In this draft, we present the distributed mobility control
   architecture that has recently been discussed in the IETF, and
   propose the three extensional schemes for distributed mobility
   control in the PMIP-based mobile networks: S-PMIP, DD-PMIP, and SD-
   PMIP. The S-PMIP is a partially distributed approach, whereas the
   other schemes, DD-PMIP and SD-PMIP, are regarded as fully
   distributed schemes. In S-PMIP, the control plane for location query
   is separated from the data plane. In DD-PMIP, no binding and query
   mechanisms are used, and a data packet will be delivered to all the
   MAGs by multicast. In SD-PMIP, the binding operation is not used.
   Instead, the location query message is multicast to all the MAGs to
   find the CoA of MN.

   For future works, the proposed distributed mobility schemes need to
   be further elaborated by reflecting more realistic network
   environments and also verified by simulations and testbed
   experimentations.







Koh, Kim & Jung        Expires September 2011                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                PMIP-DMC                      March 2011


8. References

8.1. Normative References

   [1]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
         Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [2]  Crocker, D. and Overell, P.(Editors), "Augmented BNF for
         Syntax Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, Internet Mail
         Consortium and Demon Internet Ltd., November 1997.

   [3]  Johnson, D. and et al., "Mobility Support in IPv6", RFC 3775,
         June 2004.

   [4]  Gundavelli, S. and et al., "Proxy Mobile IPv6", RFC 5213,
         August 2008.

   [5]  Chan, H. and et al., "Problem Statement for Distributed and
         Dynamic Mobility Management", IETF Internet-Draft, draft-chan-
         distributed-mobility-ps-00, October 2010.

   [6]  Yokota, H. and et al., "Use case Scenarios for Distributed
         Mobility Management, IETF Internet-Draft, draft-yokota-dmm-
         scenario-00, October 2010.

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2234] Crocker, D. and Overell, P.(Editors), "Augmented BNF for
             Syntax Specifications: ABNF", RFC 2234, Internet Mail
             Consortium and Demon Internet Ltd., November 1997.

   [RFC3775] D. Johnson, C. Perkins, and K. Arkko, "Mobility support in
              IPv6", RFC 3775, June 2004.

   [RFC5213] S. Gundavelli, K. Leung, V. Decarapalli, K. Chowdhury, and
             B. Patil, "Proxy Mobile IPv6", RFC 5213, August 2008.

8.2. Informative References

   [7]  Bosch, P., "Flat cellular (UMTS) networks", Conference of WCNC
         2007, Hong Kong, March 2007.

   [8]  Daoud, K. and Herbelin, P. and Crespi, N. "UFA: Ultra Flat
         Architecture for high bit rate services in mobile networks",
         Conference of PIMRC 2008, September 2008.



Koh, Kim & Jung        Expires September 2011                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                PMIP-DMC                      March 2011


   [9]  Zoltan Faigle, et al., "Evaluation and Comparison of
         Signalling Protocol Alternatives for the Ultra Flat
         Architecture", Conference of ICSNC 2010, August 2010.

   [10] Homepage of Mobile Optimized Future Internet,
         http://www.mofi.re.kr

   [11] 3GPP TS 23.402, "Architecture enhancements for non-3GPP
         accesses (Release 10)", V10.1.0, September 2010-09.

   [12] Wimax Forum. "WiMAX Forum Network Architecture (Stage 2:
         Architecture Tenets, Reference Model and Reference Points)",
         Release 1.0 Version 4, February 2009.

9. Acknowledgments

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.































Koh, Kim & Jung        Expires September 2011                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                PMIP-DMC                      March 2011


Authors' Addresses

   Seok Joo Koh

     Kyungpook National University, KOREA



     Email: sjkoh@knu.ac.kr

   Ji In Kim

     Kyungpook National University, KOREA



     Email: jiin16@gmail.com


   Hee Young Jung

     Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute, KOREA



     Email: hyjung@etri.re.kr






















Koh, Kim & Jung        Expires September 2011                [Page 11]

