


Network Working Group                                      T. Morin, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                              S. Litkowski
Expires: January 16, 2014                                         Orange
                                                                K. Patel
                                                           Cisco Systems
                                                                J. Zhang
                                                               R. Kebler
                                                        Juniper Networks
                                                           July 15, 2013


                        Multicast state damping
                    draft-morin-multicast-damping-00

Abstract

   This document describes procedures to damp multicast routing state
   changes and prevent the churn due to the multicast dynamicity at the
   edge of a network.  The procedures described in this document help
   avoid uncontrolled control plane load increase on the core routing
   infrastructure.  New procedures are proposed inspired from BGP
   unicast route damping principles, but adapted to multicast.  They
   cover multicast and multicast in VPNs contexts.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 16, 2014.

Copyright Notice



Morin, et al.           Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft           Multicast state damping               July 2013


   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   4.  Existing mechanisms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     4.1.  Rate-limiting of multicast control traffic . . . . . . . .  4
     4.2.  Existing PIM, IGMP and MLD timers  . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     4.3.  BGP Route Damping  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   5.  Procedures for multicast state damping . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   6.  Procedures for multicast in IP VPNs  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     6.1.  Damping P-tunnel change events . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Procedures for Ethernet VPNs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   8.  Operational considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     8.1.  Enabling and configuring multicast damping . . . . . . . . 10
     8.2.  Troubleshooting and monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     8.3.  Maximum values for exponential decay and thresholds
           parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     8.4.  Default values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   10. Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   11. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   12. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     12.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     12.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13











Morin, et al.           Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft           Multicast state damping               July 2013


1.  Introduction

   When multicast receivers join and leave a said multicast group or
   channel at the edge of a network through multicast membership control
   protocols (IGMP, MLD), multicast routing protocols (e.g.  PIM-SM, or
   mVPN) adjust multicast routing states accordingly to forward or prune
   multicast traffic to these receivers.

   Mechanisms need to be put in place to ensure that the load put on the
   control plane of core routers remains under control regardless of the
   frequency at which multicast memberships changes are made by end
   hosts.  By nature multicast memberships change based on the behavior
   of multicast applications running on end hosts, hence the frequency
   of membership changes can legitimately be much higher than the
   typical churn of unicast routing states.

   This document describes procedures aimed at protecting the control
   plane of the core network infrastructure (more specifically edge
   routers, core routers and in the case of multicast in VPN contexts
   BGP Route Reflectors) while at the same time avoiding negative
   effects on the service provided, although at the expense of a minimal
   increase in average of bandwidth use in the network.

   The base principle is described in Section 3.  Existing mechanisms
   that could be relied upon are discussed in Section 4.  Section 5
   details the proposed procedures.

   Sections 6 and 7 provide more specific details related to multicast
   in VPNs contexts.

   Finally, Section 8 discusses operational considerations related to
   the proposed mechanism.


2.  Terminology

   TBC


3.  Overview

   The procedures described in this document allows the network operator
   to configure multicast routers so that they can delay the propagation
   of multicast state prune messages, when faced with a rate of
   multicast state dynamicity exceeding a certain configurable
   threshold.  Assuming that the number of multicast states that can be
   created by a receiver is bounded, delaying the propagation of
   multicast state pruning results in setting up an upper bound to the



Morin, et al.           Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft           Multicast state damping               July 2013


   average frequency at which the router will send state updates to an
   upstream router.

   From the point of view of a downstream router, this approach has no
   impact: the multicast routing states changes that it solicits to its
   upstream router will be honored without any additional delay.  Indeed
   the propagation of joins is not impacted by the proposed defined
   procedures, and having the upstream router delay state prune
   propagation to its own upstream does not affect what traffic is sent
   to the downstream router.  In particular, the amount of bandwidth
   used on the link downstream to a router applying this damping
   technique is not increased.

   This approach increases the average bandwidth utilization on a link
   upstream to a router applying this technique: indeed, the bandwidth
   of a said multicast flow will be used for a longer time than if no
   damping was applied.  That said, it is expected that this technique
   will allow to meet the goals of protecting the multicast routing
   infrastructure control plane without a significant average increase
   of bandwidth; for instance, damping events happening at a frequency
   higher than one event per X second, can be done without increasing
   the time during which a multicast flow is present on a link of more
   than X second.

   To be practical, such a mechanism requires configurability, in
   particular, needs to offer means to control when damping is triggered
   and allow delaying Pruning for a longer period of time the more
   activity there is on a multicast state.

   Note that the issues related to control plane load due to the
   dynamicity of multicast sources coming and going in the context of
   ASM multicast, are out of the scope of this document.


4.  Existing mechanisms

4.1.  Rate-limiting of multicast control traffic

   [RFC4609] examines multicast security threats and among other things
   the risk described in Section 1.  A mechanism relying on rate-
   limiting PIM messages is proposed in section 5.3.3 [RFC4609], but has
   the identified drawbacks of impacting the service delivered and
   having side-effects on legitimate users.

4.2.  Existing PIM, IGMP and MLD timers

   In the context of PIM multicast routing protocols (), a mechanism
   exists that in some context may offer a form of de facto damping



Morin, et al.           Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft           Multicast state damping               July 2013


   mechanism for multicast states.  Indeed, when active, the prune
   override mechanism consist in having a PIM upstream router delay for
   a certain time [prune override interval] before taking into account a
   PIM Prune message sent by a downstream neighbor.  This mechanism has
   not been designed specifically for the purpose of damping multicast
   state, but as a means to allow PIM to operate on multi-access
   networks.  See [RFC4601] section 4.3.3.

   However, when active, this mechanism will prevent a downstream router
   to produce multicast routing protocol messages for a said multicast
   state that would result in the upstream router to send, to its own
   upstream, multicast routing protocol messages at a rate higher than
   1/[prune override interval].

   Similarly, the IGMP and MLD multicast membership control protocols
   can provide under the right conditions a similar behavior.

   These mechanisms are not considered suitable to meet the goals
   spelled out in Section 1, the main reasons being that:

   o  when enabled these mechanisms require additional bandwidth on the
      local link on which the effect of a Prune is delayed

   o  to be active, they may require disabling features that may
      otherwise be required or useful; one typical example is explicit
      tracking for IGMP/MLD or PIM

   o  on certain implementation, would require disabling behavior that
      cannot be turned off

   o  do not provide a suitable level of configurability

   o  do not provide a way to discriminate between multicast flows based
      on an averaged estimation of their recent past dynamicity

4.3.  BGP Route Damping

   The procedures defined in [RFC2439] for BGP route flap damping are
   useful for operators who want to control the impact of unicast route
   churn on the routing infrastructure, and offer a standardized set of
   parameters to control damping.

   These procedures are not directly relevant in a multicast context,
   for the following reasons:

   o  they are not specified for multicast routing protocol in general





Morin, et al.           Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft           Multicast state damping               July 2013


   o  even in contexts where BGP routes are used to carry multicast
      routing states (e.g.  [RFC6514]), these procedures do not allow to
      implement the principle described in this document, the main
      reason being that a damped route becomes suppressed, while the
      target behavior would be to keep advertising when damping is
      triggered on a multicast route

   However, the set of parameters standardized to control the thresholds
   of the exponential decay mechanism can be relevantly reused.  This is
   the approach proposed for the procedures described in this document
   (Section 5).  Motivations for doing so is to help the network
   operator deploy this feature based on consistent configuration
   parameter, and obtain predictable results, without the drawbacks of
   exposed in Section 4.1 and Section 4.2.


5.  Procedures for multicast state damping

   This section describes procedures for multicast state damping
   satisfying the goals spelled out in Section 1.  This section spells
   out procedures for (S,G) states in the PIM-SM protocol ([RFC4601] ;
   they apply unchanged for such states created based on multicast group
   management protocols (IGMP [RFC3376], MLD [RFC3810]) on downstream
   interfaces.  How these procedures apply for any-source multicast
   (ASM) routing state will be covered in a further revision.

   The following notions introduced in [RFC2439] are reused in these
   procedures:

   figure-of-merit  **a number reflecting the current estimation of past
      recent activity of an (S,G) multicast routing state, which evolves
      based on routing events related to this state and based an
      exponential decay algorithm ; the activation or inactivation of
      damping on the state is based on this number

   cutoff-threshold parameter  value of the *figure-of-merit* over which
      damping is applied (configurable value)

   reuse-threshold parameter  value of the *figure-of-merit* under which
      damping stops being applied (configurable value)

   decay-half-life parameter  period of time used to control how fast is
      the exponential decay of the *figure-of-merit* (configurable
      value)

   Additionally to these values a configurable "*increment-factor*"
   parameter is introduced, that controls by how much the figure-of-
   merit is incremented on multicast state update events.



Morin, et al.           Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft           Multicast state damping               July 2013


   Section Section 8.4 will propose default values for all these
   parameters.

   On reception of updated multicast membership or routing information
   on a downstream interface I for a said (S,G) state, that results in a
   change of the state of the PIM downstream state machine (see section
   4.5.3 of [RFC4601]), a router implementing these procedures MUST:

   o  apply unchanged procedures for everything relating to what
      multicast traffic ends up traffic being sent on downstream
      interfaces, including interface I

   o  increasing the *figure-of-merit* for the (S,G) by the *increment-
      factor* (updating the *figure-of-merit* based on the decay
      algorithm must be done prior to this increment)

   o  update the damping state for the (S,G) state: damping becomes
      active on the state if the recomputed *figure-of-merit* is above
      the configured *cutoff-threshold*

   o  update the upstream state machine for (S,G) as per section 4.5.7
      of [RFC4601], with the following change : if the state machine
      transitions to NotJoined state because of the reception of a PIM
      or IGMP/MLD message on a downstream interface (i.e. in the
      terminology of [RFC4601] inherited_olist(S,G) becomes NULL ), and
      if damping is active on the state, the router SHOULD NOT send the
      resulting Prune(S,G) message to its upstream neighbor ; this
      message MUST be sent when the damping state becomes, i.e. inactive
      when *figure-of-merit* decays to a value below the configured
      *reuse-threshold*

   Same techniques as the ones described in [RFC2439] can be applied to
   determine when the figure-of-merit value is recomputed based on the
   exponential decay algorithm and the configured *decay-half-life*.
   Given the specificity of multicast applications, it is REQUIRED for
   the implementation to let the operator configure the *decay-half-
   life* in seconds, rather than in minutes.  When the recomputation is
   done periodically, the period should be low enough to not
   significantly delay the inactivation of damping on a multicast state
   beyond what the operator wanted to configure (i.e. for a half-life of
   10s, recomputing the *figure-of-merit* each minute would result in a
   multicast state to remained damped for a time longer than what the
   parameters are supposed to command).

   When a (S,G) state expires, its associated *figure-of-merit* and
   damping state are removed as well.

   These procedures do interact with PIM procedures related to refreshes



Morin, et al.           Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft           Multicast state damping               July 2013


   or expiration of multicast routing states.  Indeed, PIM Prune
   messages triggered by the expiration of the (S,G) keep-alive timer,
   are not suppressed or delayed (see Section 8.3 for a discussion on
   why this specific aspect is not expected to impede the efficiency of
   damping procedures), and the reception of Join messages not causing
   transition of state on the downstream interface does not lead to
   incrementing the *figure-of-merit*.

   Note that these procedures do not impact the PIM assert mechanism, in
   particular PIM Prune messages triggered by a change of the PIM assert
   winner on the upstream interface, are not suppressed or delayed.

   Note also that no action is triggered based on the reception of PIM
   Prune messages (or corresponding IGMP/MLD messages) that relate to
   non-existing (S,G) state, in particular, no *figure-of-merit* or
   damping state is created in this case.


6.  Procedures for multicast in IP VPNs

   In VPN contexts, providing isolation between customers of a shared
   infrastructure is a core requirement resulting in even stringent
   expectations with regards to risks of denial of service attacks.
   Procedures for multicast support in IP VPNs are described in
   [RFC6513] and [RFC6514] and section 16 of [RFC6514] specifically
   spells out the need for damping the activity of C-multicast and Leaf
   Auto-discovery route.

   The procedures described in Section 5 can be applied in the VRF
   PIM-SM implementation (in the "C-PIM instance"), with the
   corresponding action to suppressing the emission of a Prune(S,G)
   message being to not withdraw the C-multicast Source Tree Join
   (C-S,C-G) BGP route.  Implementation of [RFC6513] relying on the use
   of PIM to carry C-multicast routing information MUST support this
   technique.

   In the context of [RFC6514] where BGP is used to distribute
   C-multicast routing information, an additional option consists in
   applying damping at the level of the BGP implementation based on
   existing BGP damping mechanism, applied to C-multicast Source Tree
   Join routes and Shared Tree Join routes (and also Leaf A-D routes -
   see Section 6.1), and modified to provide the same effect of
   procedures described in Section 5 along the following guidelines:

   o  not withdrawing (instead of not advertising) damped routes

   o  providing means to configure the half-life in seconds if that
      option is not already available



Morin, et al.           Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft           Multicast state damping               July 2013


   o  using parameters for the exponential decay that are specific to
      multicast, based on default values and multicast specific
      configuration

   Note that in a context where BGP Route Reflectors are used, it can be
   considered useful to also be able to apply damping on RRs.
   Additionally, for mVPN Inter-AS deployments, it can be needed to
   protect one AS from the dynamicity of multicast VPN routing events
   from other ASes.  In that perspective, it is RECOMMENDED for
   implementations to support damping mVPN C-multicast routes directly
   into BGP, without relying on the PIM-SM state machine.

   The choice to implement damping based on BGP routes or the procedures
   described in Section 5, is up to the implementor, but at least one of
   the two MUST be implemented; keeping in mind that in contexts where
   damping on RRs and ASBRs the BGP approach is RECOMMENDED.

   Note well that damping SHOULD NOT be applied to BGP routes of the
   following sub-types: "Intra-AS I-PMSI A-D Route", "Inter-AS I-PMSI
   A-D Route", "S-PMSI A-D Route", and "Source Active A-D Route".

   The following sub-sections describe additional procedures providing
   coverage against harmful effects of high multicast membership state
   dynamicity specific to mVPNs, and preserving the goals spelled out in
   Section 1.

6.1.  Damping P-tunnel change events

   When selective P-tunnels are used (see section 7 of [RFC6513]), the
   effect of updating the upstream state machine for a said (C-S,C-G)
   state on a PE connected to multicast receivers, is not only to
   generate activity to propagate C-multicast routing information to the
   source connected PE, but also to possibly trigger changes related to
   the P-tunnels carrying (C-S,C-G) traffic.  Protecting the provider
   network for an excessive amount of change in the state of P-tunnels
   is required, and this section details how it can be done.

   A PE implementing these procedures for mVPN MUST damp Leaf A-D
   routes, in the same manner as it would for C-multicast routes (see
   Section 6).

   A PE implementing these procedures for mVPN MUST damp the activity
   related to removing itself from a P-tunnel.  Possible ways to do so
   depend on the type of P-tunnel, and local implementation details are
   left up to the implementor.

   The following is proposed as example of how the above can be
   achieved.



Morin, et al.           Expires January 16, 2014                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft           Multicast state damping               July 2013


   o  For P-tunnels implemented with the PIM protocol, this consists in
      applying multicast state damping techniques describe in
      Section 5to the P-PIM instance, at least for (S,G) states
      corresponding to P-tunnels.

   o  For P-tunnels implemented with the mLDP protocol, this consists in
      applying damping techniques completely similar as the one
      described in Section 5, but generalized to apply to mLDP states

   o  For root-initiated P-tunnel (P-tunnels implemented with the P2MP
      RSVP-TE, or relying on ingress replication), no particular action
      needs to be implemented to damp P-tunnels membership as soon as
      the activity of Leaf A-D route is damped

   o  Another possibility is to base the decision to join or not join
      the P-tunnel to which a said (C-S,C-G) is bound, and to advertise
      or not advertise a Leaf A-D route related to (C-S,C-G), based on
      whether or not a C-multicast Source Tree Join route is being
      advertised for (C-S,C-G), rather than by relying on the state of
      the C-PIM Upstream state machine for (C-S,C-G)


7.  Procedures for Ethernet VPNs

   Specifications exists to support or optimize multicast and broadcast
   in the context of Ethernet VPNs ([I-D.ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast],
   [I-D.ietf-l2vpn-evpn]).  The said specifications make use of S-PMSI
   and P-tunnels and for this reason, an implementation of these
   procedures MUST follow the procedures described in Section 6.1.


8.  Operational considerations

8.1.  Enabling and configuring multicast damping

   In the context of flat multicast routing, it is proposed that
   enabling this multicast damping mechanism at the edge of a network
   providing a multicast service, for instance at receiver-facing
   routers or in ASBRs, will be sufficient to address the targeted
   issue.  Additionally, these procedures can be enabled on core routers
   as well.

   In the context of multicast VPNs, these procedures would be enabled
   on PE routers.  Additionally in the case of C-multicast routing based
   on BGP extensions ([RFC6514]) these procedures can be enabled on
   ASBRs, and possibly Route Reflectors as well.





Morin, et al.           Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft           Multicast state damping               July 2013


8.2.  Troubleshooting and monitoring

   Implementing the damping mechanisms described in this document should
   be complemented by appropriate tools to observe and troubleshoot
   damping activity.

   More specifically it is RECOMMENDED to complement the existing
   interface providing information on multicast states with information
   on eventual damping of corresponding states (e.g.  MRIB states).  In
   the case of mVPN this applies also to information on P-tunnels
   damping, and when BGP is used for C-multicast routing propagation, to
   BGP C-multicast routes.

8.3.  Maximum values for exponential decay and thresholds parameters

   [TBC]

8.4.  Default values

   [TBC]


9.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.


10.  Security Considerations

   The procedures defined in this document do not introduce additional
   security issues not already present in the contexts addressed, and
   actually aim at addressing some of the identified risks without
   introducing as much denial of service risk as some of the mechanisms
   already defined.

   The protection provided relates to the control plane of the multicast
   routing protocols, including the components implementing the routing
   protocols and the components responsible for updating the multicast
   forwarding plane.

   The procedures describe are meant to provide some level of protection
   for the router on which they are enabled by reducing the amount of
   routing state updates that it needs to send to its upstream neighbor
   or peers, but do not provide any reduction of the control plane load
   related to processing routing information from downstream neighbors.



Morin, et al.           Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft           Multicast state damping               July 2013


   Protecting routers from an increase in control plane load due to
   activity on downstream interfaces toward core routers (or in the
   context of BGP-based mVPN C-multicast routing, BGP peers) shall rely
   upon the activation of damping on corresponding downstream neighbors
   (or BGP peers) and/or at the edge of the network.  Protecting routers
   from an increase in control plane load due to activity on customer-
   facing downstream interfaces or downstream interfaces to routers in
   another administrative domain, is out of the scope of this document
   and should rely upon already defined mechanisms (see [RFC4609]).

   To be effective the procedures described here must be complemented by
   configuration limiting the number of multicast states that can be
   created on a multicast router through protocol interactions with
   multicast receivers, neighbor routers in adjacent ASes, or in
   multicast VPN contexts with multicast CEs.  Note well that the two
   mechanism may interact: state for which Prune has been requested may
   still remain taken into account for some time if damping has been
   triggered and hence result in otherwise acceptable new state from
   being successfully created.

   Additionally, it is worth noting that these procedures are not meant
   to protect against peaks of control plane load, but only address
   averaged load.  For instance, assuming a set of multicast states
   submitted to the same Join/Prune events, damping can prevent more
   than a certain number of Join/Prune messages to be sent upstream in
   the period of time that elapses between the reception of Join/Prune
   messages triggering the activation of damping on these states and
   when damping becomes inactive after decay.


11.  Acknowledgements

   We would like to thank Bruno Decreane, Jeff Haas and Lenny Giuliano
   for discussions that helped shape this proposal.  We would also like
   to thank Yakov Rekhter and Eric Rosen for their reviews and helpful
   comments.  Thanks to Wim Henderickx for his comments and support of
   this proposal.


12.  References

12.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-l2vpn-evpn]
              Sajassi, A., Aggarwal, R., Henderickx, W., Balus, F.,
              Isaac, A., and J. Uttaro, "BGP MPLS Based Ethernet VPN",
              draft-ietf-l2vpn-evpn-04 (work in progress), July 2013.




Morin, et al.           Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft           Multicast state damping               July 2013


   [I-D.ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast]
              Aggarwal, R., Rekhter, Y., Kamite, Y., and L. Fang,
              "Multicast in VPLS", draft-ietf-l2vpn-vpls-mcast-14 (work
              in progress), July 2013.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2439]  Villamizar, C., Chandra, R., and R. Govindan, "BGP Route
              Flap Damping", RFC 2439, November 1998.

   [RFC3376]  Cain, B., Deering, S., Kouvelas, I., Fenner, B., and A.
              Thyagarajan, "Internet Group Management Protocol, Version
              3", RFC 3376, October 2002.

   [RFC3810]  Vida, R. and L. Costa, "Multicast Listener Discovery
              Version 2 (MLDv2) for IPv6", RFC 3810, June 2004.

   [RFC4601]  Fenner, B., Handley, M., Holbrook, H., and I. Kouvelas,
              "Protocol Independent Multicast - Sparse Mode (PIM-SM):
              Protocol Specification (Revised)", RFC 4601, August 2006.

   [RFC6513]  Rosen, E. and R. Aggarwal, "Multicast in MPLS/BGP IP
              VPNs", RFC 6513, February 2012.

   [RFC6514]  Aggarwal, R., Rosen, E., Morin, T., and Y. Rekhter, "BGP
              Encodings and Procedures for Multicast in MPLS/BGP IP
              VPNs", RFC 6514, February 2012.

12.2.  Informative References

   [RFC4609]  Savola, P., Lehtonen, R., and D. Meyer, "Protocol
              Independent Multicast - Sparse Mode (PIM-SM) Multicast
              Routing Security Issues and Enhancements", RFC 4609,
              October 2006.


Authors' Addresses

   Thomas Morin (editor)
   Orange
   2, avenue Pierre Marzin
   Lannion  22307
   France

   Email: thomas.morin@orange.com





Morin, et al.           Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft           Multicast state damping               July 2013


   Stephane Litkowski
   Orange
   France

   Email: stephane.litkowski@orange.com


   Keyur Patel
   Cisco Systems
   170 W. Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Email: keyupate@cisco.com


   Jeffrey (Zhaohui) Zhang
   Juniper Networks Inc.
   10 Technology Park Drive
   Westford, MA  01886
   USA

   Email: zzhang@juniper.net


   Robert Kebler
   Juniper Networks Inc.
   10 Technology Park Drive
   Westford, MA  01886
   USA

   Email: rkebler@juniper.net



















Morin, et al.           Expires January 16, 2014               [Page 14]

