


Behave WG                                                  T. Savolainen
Internet-Draft                                         R. Denis-Courmont
Intended status: Standards Track                                   Nokia
Expires: March 20, 2010                               September 16, 2009


          Generation of ICMPv6 Echo Replies for Teredo Clients
              draft-denis-icmpv6-generation-for-teredo-01

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 20, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   Teredo uses return routing to discover the closest Teredo relay
   corresponding to any given peer.  Discovery is achieved by sending an
   ICMPv6 Echo Request and waiting for the appropriate relay to forward



Savolainen & Denis-Courmont  Expires March 20, 2010             [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       ICMPv6 Echo Replies for Teredo       September 2009


   the ICMPv6 Echo Reply back.  Unanswered ICMPv6 Echo Requests make
   Teredo clients assume that the peer is unreachable.  This document
   identifies two scenarios where a stateful middlebox can detect the
   lack of ICMPv6 Echo Reply and craft one for the Teredo client in
   order to avoid possibly erroneous peer unreachability assumptions.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     1.1.  Requirements Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   2.  Behavioral requirements for middleboxes . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.1.  Configuration options . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.2.  Protocol translators  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     2.3.  IPv6 firewalls  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
     2.4.  Cryptographically Generated Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   3.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     6.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     6.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8




























Savolainen & Denis-Courmont  Expires March 20, 2010             [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       ICMPv6 Echo Replies for Teredo       September 2009


1.  Introduction

   The Teredo protocol [RFC4380] uses return routing to discover the
   Teredo relay corresponding to any given IPv6 peer.  Specifically, a
   Teredo client sends an ICMPv6 Echo Request to the peer and waits for
   a Teredo relay to forward the corresponding ICMPv6 Echo Reply back.
   If this does not happen within a reasonable delay, the Teredo client
   assumes that the peer cannot be reached via Teredo.  In the IPv6
   Internet, this normally works fine, as all IPv6 nodes implement
   sending of ICMPv6 Echo Replies in response to ICMPv6 Echo Requests.
   However, two scenarios have been identified where this Teredo
   procedure might fail:

   1) When a NAT-PT [RFC2766], NAT64
   [I-D.ietf-behave-v6v4-xlate-stateful], or stateless
   [I-D.ietf-behave-v6v4-xlate] protocol translator is on the data path:
   the translator translates an IPv6 ICMPv6 Echo Request originating
   from Teredo client into an IPv4 ICMPv4 Echo Request and forwards it
   toward the IPv4 peer.  However, in the IPv4 realm, ICMPv4 does not
   always work reliably.  If the IPv4 peer does not reply with an ICMPv4
   Echo Reply for any reason (for example, ICMPv4 Echo Replies are
   disabled or filtered by an IPv4 firewall), the Teredo client will not
   get any ICMPv6 Echo Reply response packet back, and thus it will
   determine that the peer is unreachable.  That implies that transport
   sessions, which otherwise could have succeeded, will not even be
   initiated.  Effectively IPv4 nodes on the other side of protocol
   translators that do not successfully respond with ICMPv4 Echo Replies
   cannot be reachable by Teredo clients.

   2) When an IPv6 firewall blocks ICMPv6 Echo Requests or Replies: If a
   Teredo client sends an ICMPv6 Echo Request to an IPv6 destination,
   yet does not receive any ICMPv6 Echo Reply back, because IPv6
   firewall discards either packet, the Teredo client will determine
   that the peer cannot be reached.  As a consequence, it will not even
   try to route packets toward the destination.

   In both cases, Teredo-based IPv6 flows fail.  That will either cause
   delays in transport-layer connection setup, if the host is able to
   fall back to other source addresses, or complete connection failure
   in other cases.

   This document proposes a solution where a stateful middlebox detects
   the possible problem occurring and helps a Teredo client to proceed
   by generating an ICMPv6 Echo Reply for it.  The proposed solution
   does not cover scenarios involving stateless middleboxes, and is not
   generally bulletproof.  Namely, the solution may not always be able
   to detect missing ICMPv6 Echo Reply and also may give false positive
   indication about peer's reachability.  However, the solution is



Savolainen & Denis-Courmont  Expires March 20, 2010             [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       ICMPv6 Echo Replies for Teredo       September 2009


   considered as improvement over the current state.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


2.  Behavioral requirements for middleboxes

   A middlebox implementing this specification shall track ICMPv6 Echo
   Requests originated from Teredo clients.  The middlebox shall
   generate ICMPv6 Echo Replies when determined necessary.  By
   generating the reply, the middlebox allows Teredo clients to go
   forward with their connectivity establishment procedures.

   A middlebox can determine the ICMPv6 Echo Request is coming from a
   Teredo client from the packet's IPv6 source address prefix, 2001:
   0000::/32, as described in RFC4380 [RFC4380].  However, the middlebox
   cannot determine whether the ICMPv6 Echo Request is part of the
   Teredo connectivity test procedure, or just "ping" sent from the
   Teredo address.

2.1.  Configuration options

   The following options related to ICMPv6 Echo Reply generation should
   be configurable on a middlebox supporting this specification:

   o  Enable/disable: ICMPv6 Echo Reply generation for Teredo clients.

   o  Enable/disable: Forced ICMPv6 Echo Reply generation for Teredo
      clients.  If enabled, the middlebox shall always generate an
      ICMPv6 Echo Reply when it detects an ICMPv6 Echo Request was
      originated from a Teredo client.  If disabled, the middlebox shall
      generate ICMPv6 Echo Reply when one has been determined missing.

   The ICMPv6 Echo Reply generation MUST NOT be used if the middlebox is
   not known to be on the return data path.  Otherwise host-based Teredo
   client relay feature could fail.

2.2.  Protocol translators

   As NAT-PT [RFC2766] or NAT64 [I-D.ietf-behave-v6v4-xlate-stateful]
   stateful protocol translator entity is always on the return data
   path, it can detect whether an ICMPv4 Echo Reply is coming from the
   IPv4 peer and, if not, is able to generate an ICMPv6 Echo Reply
   toward the Teredo client.  The translator must not assume that lack



Savolainen & Denis-Courmont  Expires March 20, 2010             [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       ICMPv6 Echo Replies for Teredo       September 2009


   of an ICMPv4 Echo Reply implies unavailability of the IPv4 peer.  In
   the scope of this document, the stateful translator can be considered
   to be a single entity or a system containing multiple entities that
   are synchronized with each other.  In the case of stateless protocol
   translation [I-D.ietf-behave-v6v4-xlate] the ICMPv6 Echo Reply
   generation as presented here is not possible.

   A protocol translator, if and only if it is on the return path,
   SHOULD record the state of any translated ICMPv6 Echo Request, and if
   no ICMPv4 Echo Reply is received within [TBD time], or if a
   retransmitted ICMPv6 Echo Request is detected, an ICMPv6 Echo Reply
   SHOULD be generated.  The protocol translator should remove the state
   after the ICMPv4 Echo Reply is received and translated, and the
   ICMPv6 Echo Reply is generated, or TBD seconds since the last ICMPv6
   Echo Request reception without retransmission.

   A protocol translator, if and only if it is on the return path,
   SHOULD by default have automatic ICMPv6 Echo Reply generation
   enabled.

   In case forced ICMPv6 Echo Reply generation is enabled, ICMPv6 Echo
   Requests shall continue to be translated into ICMPv4 Echo Requests.
   Also, any received ICMPv4 Echo Reply shall be translated into an
   ICMPv6 Echo Reply.  In that case, the Teredo client may receive
   duplicate ICMPv6 Echo Replies.

2.3.  IPv6 firewalls

   The RFC4890 "Recommendations for Filtering ICMPv6 Messages in
   Firewalls" [RFC4890] instructs firewalls not to filter ICMPv6 Echo
   Requests, as those are needed for Teredo connectivity checks.  This
   section discusses how problems for Teredo clients can be mitigated if
   a firewall nevertheless is configured to filter ICMPv6 Echo Requests
   and or Replies.

   By default IPv6 firewall MUST NOT generate ICMPv6 Echo Replies.  The
   lack of ICMPv6 Echo Reply should continue to indicate that the peer
   is unreachable.  Furthermore, the IPv6 firewall might not be on the
   return data path in which case generated ICMPv6 Echo Replies might
   break Teredo host-based relay feature.

   A firewall that allows unsolicited incoming transport sessions
   through, but is nevertheless filtering ICMPv6 Echo Requests, SHOULD
   be configured to either let Teredo originated ICMPv6 Echo Requests
   through, or to generate ICMPv6 Echo Replies for requests originated
   by Teredo clients.  Ultimately, it is up to the network administrator
   who configures the ICMPv6 filtering in place to decide whether to
   allow or block communication between Teredo clients and services



Savolainen & Denis-Courmont  Expires March 20, 2010             [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       ICMPv6 Echo Replies for Teredo       September 2009


   protected by the firewall.

   Firewall SHOULD generate ICMPv6 Echo Reply even if the destination
   IPv6 address of ICMPv6 Echo Request is not in use.  This enables
   Teredo to proceed and does not reveal information pertaining to the
   existence and liveliness of hosts located behind the firewall.  It
   also saves the firewall from storing extra state.

2.4.  Cryptographically Generated Addresses

   Special considerations on both middleboxes and hosts are needed if
   Crypthographically Generated Addresses (CGA) [RFC3972] are taken into
   Internet-wide use.  Obviously, the middlebox cannot sign the ICMPv6
   Echo Reply it generates.  This may cause issues to other middleboxes
   and Teredo clients.

   A CGA supporting Teredo client implementation should wait for
   reasonable time [TBD?] for a signed ICMPv6 Echo Reply to arrive and
   continue resending of ICMPv6 Echo Replies, even if it meanwhile
   receives unsigned ICMPv6 Echo Replies.  This helps to counter against
   spoofed ICMPv6 Echo Reply attacks.  However, if signed ICMPv6 Echo
   Reply never arrives, the host is left with implementation and
   deployment specific decision whether to fail or continue connection
   creation procedures.

   A CGA supporting middlebox, which does filtering (e.g. source address
   validation) based on IPv6 packet signatures, has to consider whether
   or not to allow unsigned, but solicited, ICMPv6 Echo Replies through.
   This is also implementation and deployment specific consideration.


3.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to acknowledge Dave Thaler for his extensive
   review and Tim Chown and Erik Kline for their comments.

   This document was created by using template-bare.xml by Elwyn Davies
   and xml2rfc tool.


4.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


5.  Security Considerations

   Scanning for active IPv6 hosts behind a firewall is made useless by



Savolainen & Denis-Courmont  Expires March 20, 2010             [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       ICMPv6 Echo Replies for Teredo       September 2009


   firewall replying to all ICMPv6 Echo Requests sourced from Teredo
   addresses.

   Security is decreased if Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGA)
   [RFC3972] are used and systems choose to trust on unsigned ICMPv6
   Echo Replies.

   ICMPv6 Echo Reply generation MAY be rate-limited, especially per each
   IPv6 address, to counter for denial-of-service attacks against the
   middlebox itself and also against using middlebox as reflector.  The
   rate-limiting may cause problems for legitimate Teredo-clients'
   communications and thus should be used only with caution.


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3972]  Aura, T., "Cryptographically Generated Addresses (CGA)",
              RFC 3972, March 2005.

   [RFC4380]  Huitema, C., "Teredo: Tunneling IPv6 over UDP through
              Network Address Translations (NATs)", RFC 4380,
              February 2006.

6.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-behave-v6v4-xlate]
              Li, X., Bao, C., and F. Baker, "IP/ICMP Translation
              Algorithm", draft-ietf-behave-v6v4-xlate-01 (work in
              progress), September 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-behave-v6v4-xlate-stateful]
              Bagnulo, M., Matthews, P., and I. Beijnum, "NAT64: Network
              Address and Protocol Translation from IPv6 Clients to IPv4
              Servers", draft-ietf-behave-v6v4-xlate-stateful-01 (work
              in progress), July 2009.

   [METPI]    Medina, A., Allman, M., and S. Floyd, "Measuring the
              Evolution of Transport Protocols in the Internet", 2005.

   [RFC2766]  Tsirtsis, G. and P. Srisuresh, "Network Address
              Translation - Protocol Translation (NAT-PT)", RFC 2766,
              February 2000.




Savolainen & Denis-Courmont  Expires March 20, 2010             [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       ICMPv6 Echo Replies for Teredo       September 2009


   [RFC4890]  Davies, E. and J. Mohacsi, "Recommendations for Filtering
              ICMPv6 Messages in Firewalls", RFC 4890, May 2007.


Authors' Addresses

   Teemu Savolainen
   Nokia
   Hermiankatu 12 D
   TAMPERE,   FI-33720
   FINLAND

   Email: teemu.savolainen@nokia.com


   Remi Denis-Courmont
   Nokia
   P.O. Box 407
   NOKIA GROUP,   00045
   FINLAND

   Phone: +358 50 487 6315
   Email: remi.denis-courmont@nokia.com




























Savolainen & Denis-Courmont  Expires March 20, 2010             [Page 8]


