


Internet Engineering Task Force                                R. Shakir
Internet-Draft                                                        BT
Intended status: Informational                         December 27, 2012
Expires: June 30, 2013


Operational Requirements for Enhanced Error Handling Behaviour in BGP-4
           draft-ietf-grow-ops-reqs-for-bgp-error-handling-06

Abstract

   BGP is utilised as a key intra- and inter-autonomous system routing
   protocol in modern IP networks.  The failure modes, as defined by the
   original protocol standards, are based on a number of assumptions
   around the impact of session failure.  Numerous incidents both in the
   global Internet routing table and within service provider networks
   have been caused by strict handling of a single invalid UPDATE
   message causing large-scale failures in one or more autonomous
   systems.

   This memo describes the current use of BGP within service provider
   networks, and outlines a set of requirements for further work to
   enhance the mechanisms available to a BGP implementation when
   erroneous data is detected.  Whilst this document does not provide
   specification of any standard, it is intended as an overview of a set
   of enhancements to BGP to improve the protocol's robustness to suit
   its current deployment.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 30, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the



Shakir                    Expires June 30, 2013                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     December 2012


   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Requirements Language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Role of BGP-4 in Service Provider Networks . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Critical and Non-Critical Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Error Handling for Non-Critical Errors . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.1.  NLRI-level Error Handling Requirements . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.2.  Recovering RIB Consistency following NLRI-level Error
           Handling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   5.  Error Handling for Critical Errors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   8.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     9.2.  Informational References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19




















Shakir                    Expires June 30, 2013                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     December 2012


1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].














































Shakir                    Expires June 30, 2013                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     December 2012


2.  Problem Statement

   BGP has become a key intra- and inter-domain routing protocol,
   deployed within both the Internet and private networks.  The
   increased reliance on the protocol has resulted in increased demand
   for robustness - with the error handling behaviour defined in
   [RFC4271] having been shown to have caused numerous incidents within
   live network deployments.  This document provides an overview of the
   current deployment cases for BGP-4, and define a set of requirements
   (from the perspective of a network operator) for enhancing error
   handling within the protocol.

2.1.  Role of BGP-4 in Service Provider Networks

   BGP was designed as an inter-autonomous system (AS) routing protocol.
   Many of the error handling mechanisms within the protocol are defined
   in order to be guarantee consistency, and correctness of information
   between two neighbouring speakers.  The assumption is made that each
   AS operates with many adjacencies, each propagating a relatively
   small amount of routing information.  Through focusing on information
   consistency, the protocol specification prefers failure of an
   individual routing adjacency to maintaining reachability to all NLRI
   received from a particular neighbour, with the expectation that
   alternate, less direct, paths can be selected where a failure occurs.
   The assumptions of the nature of BGP deployments resulted in the
   specification made in [RFC4271] whereby the receipt of an erroneous
   UPDATE message is reacted to by sending a NOTIFICATION message, and
   tearing down the adjacency with the remote speaker from whom the
   error was observed.

   Historically, a network would deploy an interior gateway protocol
   (IGP) to carry infrastructure and customer routes, and utilise an
   external gateway protocol (EGP) such as BGP to propagate routes to
   other autonomous systems.  However, BGP's deployments have evolved
   with the growth of IP-based services.  To ensure route convergence
   within an AS is within acceptable time bounds the amount of
   information within the IGP has been minimised (typically to only
   infrastructure routes). iBGP is then utilised to carry both internal,
   customer and external routes within an AS.  As such, this has
   resulted in BGP having become an IGP, with traditional IGPs providing
   only reachability between nodes within the AS for packet forwarding
   and to establish iBGP sessions.  This change in role within the
   overall architecture of an AS has resulted in an increased robustness
   requirement for BGP, with the expectation of a similar level of
   robustness to that of an IGP being set.  The loss of an iBGP session
   can result in significant levels of unreachability internally to an
   AS, especially since there are typically limited (when compared to
   the Internet) signalling and forwarding paths available.



Shakir                    Expires June 30, 2013                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     December 2012


   In parallel with this change of deployment, the volume and nature of
   the information carried within BGP has also changed.  BGP has become
   the ubiquitous means through which service information can be
   propagated between devices.  For instance, being utilised to carry
   IP/MPLS service information such as Layer 3 IP VPN routes [RFC4364] ,
   and Layer 2 Virtual Private LAN Service device membership [RFC4761].
   Since these extensions to the protocol allow signalling of multiple
   services (represented by address families within BGP), and multiple
   customer topologies (i.e., subsets of routes within each address
   family) via the BGP protocol, the impact of session failure is
   increased.  The tear down of a single BGP session can result in a
   complete outage to all customer services signalled via the session,
   even where the triggering event is related to only one service or
   topology being carried - reflecting a disproportional impact to all
   other services and routing topologies.

   The convergence of services to IP, and BGP's changing deployment has
   resulted in a significant growth in the volume of routing information
   carried in the protocol.  In numerous networks, the RIB size of
   individual BGP speakers can be of the order of millions of paths.
   Particularly large RIBs are observed at BGP speakers performing
   aggregation and border roles (such as ASBR, or route reflector
   hierarchies).  This increased volume of routes results not only in a
   significant number of services being impacted during a protocol
   failure, but also increases the time to recovery after re-
   establishing a BGP session.  The time taken to learn, compute and
   distribute new paths increases the impact of failures on services
   carried by the network - adding further weight to the requirement to
   avoid failures, or limit the extent of their impact.  Furthermore,
   the impact of individual session failures is increased due to the
   existence of a relatively small number of highly-critical BGP
   sessions within Internet and multi-service network deployments.
   These sessions propagate a high-proportion of the reachability
   information - for instance, providing an Internet AS with the global
   routing table from upstream providers, or connecting IP/MPLS Provider
   Edge devices to route reflector hierarchies from which they are
   signalled reachability for services connected elsewhere within the
   routing domain.  In both cases, the failure of these sessions can
   result in a significant outage to customer services.

   For the current deployments of BGP, the behaviour described in
   [RFC4271] related to handling errors in UPDATE messages is
   suboptimal, and results in significant disruption to services in
   modern network deployments.  This document defines a set of
   requirements for protocol developments, and revisions to [RFC4271] to
   address these concerns through a set of generalised definitions.  It
   should be noted that the scope of these requirements is limited to
   the handling of UPDATE messages as, at the time of writing, there is



Shakir                    Expires June 30, 2013                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     December 2012


   no operational requirement to amend the means by which error handling
   in session establishment, or liveliness detection are performed.

















































Shakir                    Expires June 30, 2013                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     December 2012


3.  Critical and Non-Critical Errors

   As described in Section 2.1, the error handling behaviour described
   in [RFC4271] is applied at a per-session level, affecting all NLRI
   signalled via the adjacency on which an erroneous message is
   observed.  In order to reduce the impact of error handling to those
   NLRI affected by an erroneous UPDATE, a BGP speaker MUST limit the
   error handling mechanisms implemented to those NLRI contained within
   an erroneous UPDATE message where it is possible to do so.  Clearly,
   some errors within the formation of BGP UPDATE messages may result in
   it being impossible to reliably extract NLRI from the received
   message, and hence the same error handling procedures may not apply.
   There is therefore a requirement to classify errors based on their
   impact to the BGP UPDATE message, hence messages whereby the NLRI
   attribute cannot be extracted or parsed are referred to throughout
   this document as Critical errors.  These Critical errors are limited
   to:

   o  UPDATE Message Length errors - where the specified UPDATE message
      length is inconsistent with the sum of the Total Path Attribute
      and Withdrawn Routes length.  These errors relate to message
      packing or framing, and result in cases whereby the NLRI attribute
      cannot be correctly extracted from the message.

   o  Errors parsing the NLRI attribute of an UPDATE message - where the
      contents of the IPv4 Unicast Advertised or Withdrawn Routes
      attributes, or multi-protocol BGP NLRI attributes (MP_REACH_NLRI
      and/or MP_UNREACH_NLRI as defined in [RFC2858]), cannot be
      successfully parsed.

   In the case of Critical errors is expected that error handling is
   applied at a session level as per Section 5 of this document.

   All errors whereby the contained NLRI can be extracted, are referred
   to as Non-Critical.  It is expected that the following cases fall
   within this category:

   o  Zero or invalid length errors in path attributes, excluding those
      containing NLRI, or where the length of all path attributes
      contained within the UPDATE does not correspond to the total path
      attribute length.

   o  Messages where invalid data or flags are contained in a path
      attribute that does not relate to the NLRI.

   o  UPDATE messages missing mandatory attributes, unrecognised non-
      optional attributes, or those that contain duplicate or invalid
      attributes (be they unsupported, or unexpected).



Shakir                    Expires June 30, 2013                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     December 2012


   o  Those messages where the NEXT_HOP, the MP_REACH_NLRI next-hop
      values are missing, zero-length, or invalid for the relevant
      address family.

   For these Non-Critical errors, the NLRI-targeted error handling
   requirements described in Section 4 should be followed.

   In order to maximise the number of cases whereby the NLRI attributes
   can be reliably extracted from a received message, where a BGP
   speaker supports multi-protocol extensions, the MP_REACH_NLRI and
   MP_UNREACH_NLRI attributes SHOULD be utilised for all address
   families (including IPv4 Unicast) and these attributes should be the
   first attribute contained within the UPDATE message.

   Where attributes are introduced by future extensions to the BGP
   protocol the error handling behaviour applied MUST be assumed that
   applied to Non-Critical errors, unless otherwise specified within the
   per-extension memo, or the attribute relates directly to carrying
   NLRI.  Authors of future BGP extensions SHOULD specify the error
   handling behaviour required for new attributes in terms of the
   classification into a Critical or Non-Critical error on a per-
   attribute error basis.





























Shakir                    Expires June 30, 2013                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     December 2012


4.  Error Handling for Non-Critical Errors

4.1.  NLRI-level Error Handling Requirements

   When a Non-Critical error is detected within an UPDATE message a BGP
   speaker MUST NOT send a NOTIFICATION message to the remote neighbour.
   Instead, the NLRI contained within the message MUST be considered as
   no longer viable until they are updated by a subsequent UPDATE
   message, thus treating the NLRI as withdrawn as per the treat-as-
   withdraw mechanism described in [I-D.chen-ebgp-error-handling].

   Network operators SHOULD recognise that where such behaviour is
   implemented black-holing or looping of traffic may occur in the
   period between the NLRI being treated as withdrawn, and subsequent
   updates, dependent upon the routing topology.  It SHOULD be noted
   that such periods of RIB inconsistency (where one speaker has
   advertised a prefix, which has been treated as withdrawn by the
   receiving speaker) may be relatively long lived, based on situations
   such as an erroneous implementation at the receiver, or the error
   occurring within an optional, transitive attribute not examined by
   the advertising device.  In order to allow operators to select
   sessions on which this risk of inconsistency is acceptable, an
   implementation SHOULD provide means by which NLRI-level error
   handling for Non-Critical errors can be disabled on a per-session
   basis.

   Since the Non-Critical error handling required within this section
   results in no NOTIFICATION message being transmitted, the fact that
   an error has occurred and hence there may be inconsistency between
   the local and remote BGP speaker MUST be flagged to the network
   operator through standard operational interfaces (e.g., SNMP,
   syslog).  The information highlighted MUST include the NLRI
   identified to be contained within the error message, and SHOULD
   contain a exact copy of the received message for further analysis.

   In order that the operator of the BGP speaker from whom an erroneous
   UPDATE message has been advertised is aware of the fact that some
   NLRI advertised to the remote speaker have been considered withdrawn
   due to being contained within an erroneous UPDATE, a BGP speaker
   SHOULD support mechanisms to report the occurrence of Non-Critical
   error handling to the remote speaker.  The receiving speaker SHOULD
   transmit the NLRI contained within the erroneous message to the
   advertising speaker.  An exact copy of the received UPDATE message
   SHOULD also be sent.

   The exchange of information related to events occurring as a result
   of BGP messages is not currently supported by any extension to the
   protocol.  Clearly, where the two speakers reside within the same



Shakir                    Expires June 30, 2013                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     December 2012


   administrative domain, shared logging infrastructure can be utilised
   to identify the root cause of errors, however, in many cases
   neighbouring BGP speakers reside within separate administrative
   domains (e.g., are ASBRs for Internet or private networks).  In this
   case, mechanisms allowing transmission in-band to the BGP session
   SHOULD be utilised (e.g., the OPERATIONAL message described in
   [I-D.ietf-idr-operational-message]).  Such an in-band channel is
   preferred based on the BGP session representing a pre-established
   trusted channel which is related to a specific BGP-speaking device
   within a network.  It is expected that the overall system scalability
   of a BGP speaker is improved through utilising the existing channel,
   rather than incurring overhead for maintaining many additional
   logging-specific protocol sessions for relatively infrequent
   messaging events when errors occur.  However, the extensions
   providing such a channel MUST consider their impact to base BGP
   protocol functions such as the transmission of UPDATE or KEEPALIVE
   messages, and SHOULD limit the volume of messaging to direct
   reactions to Non-Critical errors occurring.  These considerations
   SHOULD be made in order to ensure that no compromise is made to the
   security, scalability and robustness of BGP.  Where additional BGP
   monitoring information that is not suitable to be carried in-band is
   required, out-of-band mechanisms such as the BMP protocol described
   in [I-D.ietf-grow-bmp] could be utilised to provide further
   information relating to erroneous messages.

4.2.  Recovering RIB Consistency following NLRI-level Error Handling

   Following NLRI being treated as withdrawn due to Non-Critical error
   handling, inconsistencies exist between the Adj-RIB-Out of the
   advertising BGP speaker, and the Adj-RIB-In of the receiving device.
   These inconsistencies may result in forwarding loops or blackholing
   of traffic in some routing topologies.  In order to ensure that such
   cases can be recovered from a means by which a validation and
   recovery of consistency can be achieved SHOULD be provided to an
   operator.  This function may be provided through enhancing the ROUTE-
   REFRESH [RFC2918] mechanism to add means to identify the beginning
   and end of a replay of the entire Adj-RIB-Out of the advertising
   speaker (as per the suggestion in
   [I-D.ietf-idr-bgp-enhanced-route-refresh]).

   As Non-Critical error handling is localised to the NLRI contained
   within the erroneous UPDATE message, a targeted recovery mechanism
   MAY be provided allowing a speaker to request re-advertisement of a
   particular subset of the Adj-RIB-Out.  Where such targeted refresh
   functions are available, they SHOULD be preferred to mechanisms
   requesting re-advertisement of the whole Adj-RIB-Out based on their
   more limited use of CPU and network resources.




Shakir                    Expires June 30, 2013                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     December 2012


   A BGP speaker may automatically trigger recovery mechanisms such as
   those described in this section following the receipt of an erroneous
   UPDATE message identified as Non-Critical to expedite recovery.  It
   should be noted that if automatic recovery mechanisms trigger only
   re-advertisement of an identical erroneous message, they are likely
   to be ineffective.  Additionally, where the best-path to be
   advertised by remote speaker changes, this will be advertised
   directly, without a requirement for a request from the receiver.
   However, in some cases, RIB consistency recovery mechanisms may
   prompt alternate UPDATE message packing, and hence allow quicker
   recovery.  Where such mechanisms are implemented, mechanisms focused
   to smaller sets of NLRI SHOULD be preferred over those requesting the
   entire RIB.  In addition, such mechanisms SHOULD have dampening
   mechanisms to ensure that their impact to computational and network
   resources is limited.




































Shakir                    Expires June 30, 2013                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     December 2012


5.  Error Handling for Critical Errors

   Where an UPDATE message containing a Critical error is received,
   since the NLRI cannot be extracted, error handling mechanisms must be
   applied at the per-session level.  In order to limit the impact to
   network operation, these session-level mechanisms MUST be applied in
   a manner which allows the paths NLRI received from the remote speaker
   to continue to be utilised for forwarding during the session reset
   and re-establishment.  It is envisaged that this requirement may be
   met through extension of the BGP Graceful Restart mechanism
   ([RFC4724]) to be triggered by NOTIFICATION messages indicating the
   occurrence of a Critical error.  Such an extension allows a restart
   of the TCP and BGP sessions between two speakers, in a similar manner
   to the current session restart behaviour triggered by a NOTIFICATION
   message.  In order to maximise the level of re-initialisation which
   occurs during such a restart triggered by a Critical error, BGP
   speakers MAY re-initialise memory structures related to the
   Adj-RIB-In and Adj-RIB-Out associated with the session on which the
   erroneous UPDATE was observed.

   Where such a restart event occurs, the continued liveliness of the
   remote device MAY be verified by BGP KEEPALIVE packets or other OAM
   functions such as Bidirectional Forwarding Detection ([RFC5880]).  In
   cases where the observed Critical BGP error is indicative of a wider
   device failure of the remote speaker, it is expected that a BGP
   sessions will not re-establish correctly.  Each BGP speaker SHOULD
   maintain a limited time window in which session restart is expected
   in order to mitigate this possibility.

   When a Critical error occurs, the network operator MUST be made aware
   of its occurrence through local logging mechanisms (e.g., SNMP traps
   or syslog).  The BGP speaker receiving an UPDATE message identified
   as a Critical error MUST log its occurrence and a copy of the UPDATE
   message.  Where a inter-device messaging mechanism is implemented (as
   discussed in Section Section 4.1) a copy of the erroneous UPDATE
   message SHOULD be transmitted to the remote speaker.  Both BGP
   speakers MUST indicate to an operator the cause of a session restart
   was a Critical error in an UPDATE message.

   Since repeated critical errors (and session restarts) may have an
   impact in overall device scaling if the failure condition is not
   resolved by session restart, a BGP speaker MAY choose to revert to
   the session tear down behaviour described in the base BGP
   specification.  This reversion SHOULD only be utilised after a number
   of attempts which SHOULD be controllable by the network operator.
   Where a session is shut down, the implementation MAY utilise a back-
   off from session restart attempts (as per the IdleHoldTimer described
   in the BGP FSM [RFC4271]).  Where reversion to tearing down the BGP



Shakir                    Expires June 30, 2013                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     December 2012


   session is performed, a speaker SHOULD limit the impact of
   withdrawing prefixes from downstream speakers where possible.  It is
   envisaged that this can be achieved by utilising a mechanism such as
   the BGP Graceful Shutdown procedure as described in
   [I-D.ietf-grow-bgp-gshut].














































Shakir                    Expires June 30, 2013                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     December 2012


6.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.
















































Shakir                    Expires June 30, 2013                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     December 2012


7.  Security Considerations

   The requirements outlined in this document provide mechanisms which
   limit the overall impact of the response to an error in a BGP UPDATE
   message.  This is of benefit to the security of a BGP speaker.
   Without these mechanisms, where erroneous UPDATE messages relating to
   a single NLRI entry can be propagated to a BGP speaker, all other
   NLRI carried via the same session are affected by the resulting
   session tear-down.  This may result in an AS being isolated from
   particular routing domains (such as the Internet) should an UPDATE
   message be propagated via targeted specific paths.  It is envisaged
   by reducing the impact of the reaction of the receiving speaker to
   these messages, the isolation can be constrained to specific sets of
   NLRI, or a specific topology.

   A number of the mechanisms meeting the requirements specified within
   the document (particularly those relating to operational monitoring)
   may raise further security concerns.  Such concerns will be addressed
   during the specification of these mechanisms.
































Shakir                    Expires June 30, 2013                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     December 2012


8.  Acknowledgements

   The author would like to thank the following network operators for
   their insight, and valuable input into defining the requirements for
   a variety of deployments of the BGP protocol: Shane Amante, Bruno
   Decraene, Rob Evans, David Freedman, Wes George, Tom Hodgson, Sven
   Huster, Jonathan Newton, Neil McRae, Thomas Mangin, Tom Scholl and
   Ilya Varlashkin.

   In addition, many thanks are extended to Jeff Haas, Wim Hendrickx,
   Tony Li, Alton Lo, Keyur Patel, John Scudder, Adam Simpson and Robert
   Raszuk for their expertise relating to implementations of the BGP
   protocol.






































Shakir                    Expires June 30, 2013                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     December 2012


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2858]  Bates, T., Rekhter, Y., Chandra, R., and D. Katz,
              "Multiprotocol Extensions for BGP-4", RFC 2858, June 2000.

   [RFC2918]  Chen, E., "Route Refresh Capability for BGP-4", RFC 2918,
              September 2000.

   [RFC4271]  Rekhter, Y., Li, T., and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway
              Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, January 2006.

   [RFC4364]  Rosen, E. and Y. Rekhter, "BGP/MPLS IP Virtual Private
              Networks (VPNs)", RFC 4364, February 2006.

   [RFC4724]  Sangli, S., Chen, E., Fernando, R., Scudder, J., and Y.
              Rekhter, "Graceful Restart Mechanism for BGP", RFC 4724,
              January 2007.

   [RFC4761]  Kompella, K. and Y. Rekhter, "Virtual Private LAN Service
              (VPLS) Using BGP for Auto-Discovery and Signaling",
              RFC 4761, January 2007.

   [RFC5880]  Katz, D. and D. Ward, "Bidirectional Forwarding Detection
              (BFD)", RFC 5880, June 2010.

9.2.  Informational References

   [I-D.chen-ebgp-error-handling]
              Chen, E., Mohapatra, P., and K. Patel, "Revised Error
              Handling for BGP Updates from External Neighbors",
              draft-chen-ebgp-error-handling-01 (work in progress),
              September 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-grow-bgp-gshut]
              Francois, P., Decraene, B., Pelsser, C., Patel, K., and C.
              Filsfils, "Graceful BGP session shutdown",
              draft-ietf-grow-bgp-gshut-04 (work in progress),
              October 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-grow-bmp]
              Scudder, J., Fernando, R., and S. Stuart, "BGP Monitoring
              Protocol", draft-ietf-grow-bmp-07 (work in progress),
              October 2012.



Shakir                    Expires June 30, 2013                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     December 2012


   [I-D.ietf-idr-bgp-enhanced-route-refresh]
              Patel, K., Chen, E., and B. Venkatachalapathy, "Enhanced
              Route Refresh Capability for BGP-4",
              draft-ietf-idr-bgp-enhanced-route-refresh-03 (work in
              progress), December 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-idr-operational-message]
              Freedman, D., Raszuk, R., and R. Shakir, "BGP OPERATIONAL
              Message", draft-ietf-idr-operational-message-00 (work in
              progress), March 2012.









































Shakir                    Expires June 30, 2013                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft     Requirements for BGP Error Handling     December 2012


Author's Address

   Rob Shakir
   BT
   pp C3L, BT Centre
   81, Newgate Street
   London  EC1A 7AJ
   UK

   Email: rob.shakir@bt.com
   URI:   http://www.bt.com/








































Shakir                    Expires June 30, 2013                [Page 19]

