


Network Working Group                                         P. Francis
Internet-Draft                                                   MPI-SWS
Intended status: Informational                                     X. Xu
Expires: April 21, 2010                                           Huawei
                                                              H. Ballani
                                                              Cornell U.
                                                                  D. Jen
                                                                    UCLA
                                                               R. Raszuk
                                                                    Self
                                                                L. Zhang
                                                                    UCLA
                                                        October 18, 2009


         Proposal for Auto-Configuration in Virtual Aggregation
                     draft-ietf-grow-va-auto-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 21, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of



Francis, et al.          Expires April 21, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               VA Auto Config                 October 2009


   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   Virtual Aggregation as specified in [I-D.ietf-grow-va] requires a
   certain amount of configuration, namely virtual prefixes (VP), a VP
   list, type of tunnel, and popular prefixes.  This draft proposes
   optional approaches to auto-configuration of popular prefixes and the
   VP list, and discusses the pros and cons of each.  If these proposals
   are accepted, they will be incorporated into [I-D.ietf-grow-va].


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Requirements notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Syntax for the tags  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Config of Popular Prefixes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  Operation of the should-install tag  . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       3.1.1.  Sending the should-install tag . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       3.1.2.  Receiving the should-install tag . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Config of the VP list  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.1.  VP-route tag . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.2.  Can suppress tag . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10


















Francis, et al.          Expires April 21, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               VA Auto Config                 October 2009


1.  Introduction

   Virtual Aggregation as specified in [I-D.ietf-grow-va] requires a
   certain amount of configuration, namely:

   1.  Each Aggregation Point Router (APR) must be configured with the
       VPs for which it is an APR.
   2.  Every router must be configured with the VP list (a list of all
       VPs).  This allows the router to know which prefixes can and
       cannot be FIB-suppressed.
   3.  Every router should be configured with a list of prefixes that
       should be FIB-installed (for instance because they have large
       traffic volumes).
   4.  Every router should be configured as to the tunnel type.

   Of these four items, the first and last cannot be automated.  Both,
   however, represent a relatively small amount of configuration.  The
   second and third are more significant, and this draft proposes
   mechanisms for partially or fully automating them.  If any of these
   proposals are accepted, they will be incorporated into the main VA
   draft.  In any event, they would be considered as optional.  The
   manually configured VP-list would still be mandatory, though an ISP
   could choose not to use it if one of the options described here is
   available.  ([I-D.ietf-grow-va]).

   All of the approaches described in this draft involve tagging routes
   with a standard extended communities attribute.  There are three such
   tags, the "should-install" tag, the "VP-route" tag, and the "can-
   suppress" tag.  The should-install tag is for the purpose of
   automating the configuration of popular prefixes that are popular by
   virtue of having high traffic volume.  The VP-route and can-suppress
   tags represent two alternatives for the VP-list.  Note that usage of
   the should-install tag (popular prefixes config) is completely
   orthogonal with usage of either the VP-route or can-suppress tag
   (replacement for VP-list config).

1.1.  Requirements notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2.  Syntax for the tags

   All three tags can be conveyed with an Extended Communities Attribute
   [RFC4360] to be assigned by IANA.  For all three tags, the Transitive
   Bit MUST be set to value 1 (the community is non- transitive across



Francis, et al.          Expires April 21, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               VA Auto Config                 October 2009


   ASes).


3.  Config of Popular Prefixes

   Broadly speaking, a Popular Prefix is any prefix that does not have
   to be FIB-installed, but should never-the-less be FIB-installed.  For
   instance:

      Prefixes for customer networks should be installed (so that
      traffic to customers does not incur the extra delay associated
      with the detour through an APR).  Since customer routes are in any
      event tagged with a community attribute for routing policy
      reasons, the decision to FIB-install them is entirely local and
      requires no standardization.
      If an ASBR chooses its external peer as a next-hop for a given
      prefix, then it should FIB-install that prefix.

   Prefixes to which there is a large volume of traffic should also be
   FIB-installed.  This is to reduce the additional load the results
   from the extra hop(s) that packets must take on the APR detour.
   Installing these prefixes is not trivial.  The volume of traffic must
   be measured, the high-volume prefixes identified, and routers
   configured to FIB-install these prefixes.  Furthermore, the router
   where the prefix must be FIB-installed is typically different from
   where the high-volume is measured.  Normally, the highest volume for
   any given prefix will be seen at the egress routers for that prefix.
   However, the ingress router is where FIB installation should take
   place.

   The proposal is to identify high-volume prefixes at ASBRs and RRs
   (routers that forward iBGP updates), and to tag routes to these
   prefixes with a community attribute that effectively means "should
   FIB-install".  How to identify high-volume prefixes is a local
   matter, but one way would be by examining netflow records from the
   router.  In principle, however, a router could internally detect
   high-volume prefixes.  Identification of high-volume prefixes need
   only be done for either:

   1.  Outgoing traffic on ASBRs peering with non-customer networks
       (peers or transits).
   2.  Route Reflectors, probably limited to traffic that is routed
       towards the edge.

   Either way, the set of routers where this identification must take
   place is limited.





Francis, et al.          Expires April 21, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               VA Auto Config                 October 2009


3.1.  Operation of the should-install tag

3.1.1.  Sending the should-install tag

   For routers implementing this optional feature, it must be possible
   to configure a router to attach the community attribute (the "should-
   install tag") to routes for a given prefix.  In practice, this may be
   automatically done by the system that receives and analyzes netflow
   records, or it may be done manually by a network administrator.  Once
   configured as such, the router must attach the should-install tag to
   BGP updates containing the prefix.  The update may be generated
   immediately after the configuration takes place, or it may be put off
   until the next time the update is normally transmitted.

   If the configuration is removed, the router must not attach the
   should-install tag to subsequent updates containing the prefix.  An
   update without the should-install tag may be generated immediately
   after the configuration is removed, or it may be put off until the
   next time the update is normally transmitted.

3.1.2.  Receiving the should-install tag

   If the best-path route to a given prefix (that doesn't otherwise have
   to be FIB-installed), has the should-install tag, then the router
   locally decides whether or not to FIB-install the prefix.  If there
   is no room in the FIB for a new prefix, the router may choose to
   remove an existing FIB entry (for instance, the oldest entry) to make
   room for the new entry.

3.2.  Discussion

   The time-frame over which should-install tags are attached and
   removed should be quite long, at least hours if not days.  Evidence
   shows that high-volume prefixes tend to stay high-volume on average
   over long periods of times (days or even weeks) [nsdi09].

   There are a number of limited scenarios whereby a should-install tag
   is not successfully conveyed to all routers in an AS.  This does not
   result in non-delivery of packets, only inefficiencies.

   Consider the case where an AS is using Route Reflectors (RRs), and is
   using ASBRs to transmit should-install tags.  Imagine two ASBRs, BR1
   and BR2, that advertise routes to some prefix P. Further, both BR1
   and BR2 are clients of the same RR.  Assume that there is high-volume
   to prefix P at BR1 but not at BR2.  As a result, BR1 attaches the
   should-install tag and BR2 does not.  If the RR for any reason
   prefers the route via BR2 over BR1, then it the should-install tag
   will not be passed on by the RR.  (Although note that a likely



Francis, et al.          Expires April 21, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               VA Auto Config                 October 2009


   outcome of this is that BR2 will start to see high volumes of traffic
   to P, and eventually will set the should-install tag.)

   Next consider the same topology as above (BR1 and BR2 both clients of
   the same RR), but now assume that it is the RR that is used to
   transmit should-install tags.  Assume that the RR detects high-volume
   to prefix P and attaches the should-install tag for routes to P.
   Assume that both BR1 and BR2 choose their respective external peers
   as the next hop to P, and of course advertise this next hop to the
   RR.  The RR selects and advertises a best path, say via BR1.  When
   the RR advertises this best path to BR2, BR2 ignores it and so does
   not FIB-install the route.  The end result here is that packets
   detour through an APR and then are tunneled back to the ASBR.
   (Though as mentioned earlier in this section, prefixes where the next
   hop is an external peer should be FIB-installed as a matter of local
   policy.)


4.  Config of the VP list

   As the current VA specification stands, routers have to know which
   prefixes they must FIB-install and and which they need not FIB-
   install.  The VP-list tells them this: they must FIB-install routes
   to VPs, and they need not FIB-install routes to prefixes that fall
   within VPs for which they are not an APR.  The same VP-list must be
   installed in every router (though it is not a problem that they
   differ for brief periods during modification of the VP-list).
   Configuration of the VP-list is not nearly as hard as configuration
   of popular prefixes, but it is nevert-the-less a significant task
   that we'd just as soon do without.

   There are two basic approaches to automating this configuration.  One
   is to have APRs tag the routes to VPs that they originate, and let
   routers effectively reconstruct the VP-list from these tags.  This
   approach has the advantage that no configuration what-so-ever is
   required to solve the problem.

   The other is to have ASBRs tag the routes that need not be installed.
   This can be done by configuring a list of one or more "VP-ranges" in
   the ASBRs.  This is simpler than the current configured VP-list
   approach in two regards.  First, fewer routers need to be configured
   (only ASBRs interfacing with peer and provider (non-customer)
   networks.  Second, the VP-range is simpler than the VP-list.  In most
   cases, once an ISP is past its initial VA roll-out phase, it would
   consist of a single 0/0 entry.

   These two approaches are discussed in the following sections.




Francis, et al.          Expires April 21, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               VA Auto Config                 October 2009


4.1.  VP-route tag

   Routers that receive a route with the communities attribute
   indicating the VP-route tag must FIB-install the associated prefix
   (VP).  They may FIB-suppress any sub-prefixes that fall within the
   VP.

   Prefixes that do not fall within any known VP must be FIB-installed.
   During BGP initialization (i.e. before the End-of-RIB marker is
   received [RFC4724]), however, the full set of VPs is not yet known.
   Therefore, what routers do with prefixes that do not fall within any
   known VP during initialization is a local matter.

   There are two basic strategies, install by default and suppress by
   default.  Each has pros and cons, though the latter is generally
   prefered.  With install by default, some prefixes will be installed
   only to be removed later (when the parent VP is learned).  This can
   actually ultimately slow down convergence, since it takes time to
   modify the FIB.  Also, this could result in the FIB filling up with
   entries.

   The problem with suppress by default is that entries that ultimately
   will be installed are not immediately installed.  Instead, they are
   installed only after the End-of-RIB marker.  This approach, however,
   does avoid the pitfalls of install by default, and ultimately could
   converge faster because FIB churn is avoided.  There are also several
   mitigating factors that should make suppress by default work well in
   practice.  First, if the router uses Graceful Restart [RFC4724], then
   in any event forwarding can continue to take place even when the BGP
   session is restarted.  Second, the router can have a policy whereby
   prefixes with a should-install tag are automatically installed.  In
   this way, high-volume prefixes are installed and so most traffic will
   in fact be forwarded by the End-of-RIB.  Finally, if the router has a
   policy that customer prefixes are always installed, then flows
   between customers are also correctly forwarded by the End-of-RIB.

   Another issue with the VP-route tag is what to do if all APRs for a
   given VP stop operating (i.e. crash) and so all VP routes are
   withdrawn.  Strictly speaking, the router would immediately start
   installing the sub-prefixes within that VP.  This could lead to the
   FIB filling up.  Also, if the APR is thrashing (going up and down),
   then all routers in the AS could end up repeatedly adding and
   removing the same set of prefixes.

   How to deal with this is a local matter.  There are two questions the
   router must answer:





Francis, et al.          Expires April 21, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               VA Auto Config                 October 2009


   1.  How should hysteresis be applied to the (implicit) VP list to
       avoid FIB churn?
   2.  How are FIB entries prioritized in the case where the FIB is
       full?

   Regarding VP list hysteresis, perhaps the simplest thing to do is to
   use standard route flap damping on the VP routes [RFC2439].
   Alternatively, the router could simply not install sub-prefixes for a
   recently known VP for some period of time (minutes) after which the
   VP route was withdrawn, or only install sub-prefixes slowly (to
   minimize the impact of churn).

   Regarding FIB entry prioritization, routers must in any event install
   VP routes and sub-prefixes within the VPs for which the router is an
   APR.  If the FIB does not have room for at least these entries, then
   VA has simply been configured incorrectly in the AS, and the
   administrator must fix this.  Beyond these necessary FIB entries,
   prioritization is a local matter.  A reasonable prioritization,
   however, is the following: 1) customer routes, 2) routes with should-
   install tag, 3) routes for sub-prefixes of recently withdrawn VPs, 4)
   other.

4.2.  Can suppress tag

   With this approach, some set of ASBRs are configured with a "VP
   range".  This is the ranges of IP address that are covered by all
   VPs.  In a mature deployment of VA, the range would amount to all IP
   addresses, in which case the VP range is simply 0/0.  Early in VA
   deployment, when an ISP is still in the testing or roll-out phase,
   the VP range would consist of multiple entries.  At a minimum, the
   set of ASBRs so configured are those with peers in peer or transit
   ASes.  If the AS has a policy that customer routes are always FIB-
   installed, then it is not necessary to configure routers that connect
   to customer ASes.

   VP-range configured ASBRs must tag any route whose prefix falls
   within the VP range with a "can-suppress" tag, with the following
   exceptions:

   1.  Routers must never tag a VP route with can-suppress.
   2.  If the ISP has a policy of FIB-installing customer routes, then
       routes received from customers should not be tagged with can-
       suppress.

   A router receiving a route with a can-suppress tag first determines
   if it must FIB-install the prefix.  It would have to do this for
   instance if the prefix falls within a VP for which it is an APR.  If
   the router does not have to install the prefix, then it may suppress



Francis, et al.          Expires April 21, 2010                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               VA Auto Config                 October 2009


   the prefix at its own discretion.

   When the can-suppress approach is used, then routers must FIB-install
   any prefixes not tagged as can-suppress.  The primary reason for this
   is so that VP routes are always installed.

   Note that in the case where all VP routes for a given VP are
   withdrawn, routers would not be able to FIB-install the (now
   unreachable) sub-prefixes.  This is because, with the can-suppress
   approach, routers do not actually know which routes are VPs.


5.  IANA Considerations

   IANA must assign type values for the Extended Communities Attributes
   that convey the tags.


6.  Security Considerations

   As of this writing, there are no known new security threats
   introduced by this draft.


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.ietf-grow-va]
              Francis, P., Xu, X., Ballani, H., Jen, D., Raszuk, R., and
              L. Zhang, "FIB Suppression with Virtual Aggregation",
              draft-ietf-grow-va-00 (work in progress), May 2009.

   [RFC1997]  Chandrasekeran, R., Traina, P., and T. Li, "BGP
              Communities Attribute", RFC 1997, August 1996.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC4360]  Sangli, S., Tappan, D., and Y. Rekhter, "BGP Extended
              Communities Attribute", RFC 4360, February 2006.

   [RFC4724]  Sangli, S., Chen, E., Fernando, R., Scudder, J., and Y.
              Rekhter, "Graceful Restart Mechanism for BGP", RFC 4724,
              January 2007.






Francis, et al.          Expires April 21, 2010                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               VA Auto Config                 October 2009


7.2.  Informative References

   [RFC2439]  Villamizar, C., Chandra, R., and R. Govindan, "BGP Route
              Flap Damping", RFC 2439, November 1998.

   [nsdi09]   Ballani, H., Francis, P., Cao, T., and J. Wang, "Making
              Routers Last Longer with ViAggre", ACM Usenix NSDI 2009 ht
              tp://www.usenix.org/events/nsdi09/tech/full_papers/
              ballani/ballani.pdf, April 2009.


Authors' Addresses

   Paul Francis
   Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
   Gottlieb-Daimler-Strasse
   Kaiserslautern  67633
   Germany

   Phone: +49 631 930 39600
   Email: francis@mpi-sws.org


   Xiaohu Xu
   Huawei Technologies
   No.3 Xinxi Rd., Shang-Di Information Industry Base, Hai-Dian District
   Beijing, Beijing  100085
   P.R.China

   Phone: +86 10 82836073
   Email: xuxh@huawei.com


   Hitesh Ballani
   Cornell University
   4130 Upson Hall
   Ithaca, NY  14853
   US

   Phone: +1 607 279 6780
   Email: hitesh@cs.cornell.edu










Francis, et al.          Expires April 21, 2010                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               VA Auto Config                 October 2009


   Dan Jen
   UCLA
   4805 Boelter Hall
   Los Angeles, CA  90095
   US

   Phone:
   Email: jenster@cs.ucla.edu


   Robert Raszuk
   Self


   Phone:
   Email: robert@raszuk.net


   Lixia Zhang
   UCLA
   3713 Boelter Hall
   Los Angeles, CA  90095
   US

   Phone:
   Email: lixia@cs.ucla.edu

























Francis, et al.          Expires April 21, 2010                [Page 11]


