


GROW Working Group                                            H. Ballani
Internet-Draft                                                Cornell U.
Intended status: Informational                                P. Francis
Expires: January 5, 2010                                         MPI-SWS
                                                                  D. Jen
                                                                    UCLA
                                                                   X. Xu
                                                                  Huawei
                                                                L. Zhang
                                                                    UCLA
                                                            July 4, 2009


                   Performance of Virtual Aggregation
                     draft-ietf-grow-va-perf-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 5, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights



Ballani, et al.          Expires January 5, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               VA Performance                    July 2009


   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   The document "FIB Suppression with Virtual Aggregation"
   [I-D.francis-intra-va] describes how router FIB size may be reduced.
   This approach entails a trade-off between path-length and load versus
   FIB size.  It also has the potential to reduce convergence time.
   This document describes the results of several studies that examine
   these characteristics.  The results of a study for a Tier-1 ISP with
   a relatively sophisticated deployment of VA, shows that FIB size
   could be reduced ten times or more with a worst-case latency penalty
   of 4ms and a worst-case load increase of <1.5%.  Another study,
   examining a much simpler style of VA deployment, also for a Tier-1
   ISP, shows that FIB size can be reduced by four times (in routers
   serving as APRs), and more than 10 times in other routers.  Here,
   worst-case latency increase was 16 ms, though this is almost
   certainly an over-estimate, both because traceroute was used to make
   the measurement, and because popular prefixes were not considered.
































Ballani, et al.          Expires January 5, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               VA Performance                    July 2009


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     1.2.  Temporary Sections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       1.2.1.  Document revisions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   2.  The NSDI 2009 Study on FIB size versus load and stretch  . . .  5
   3.  The IETF74 Study . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.1.  Evaluation Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     3.2.  Evaluation Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   4.  Convergence Time . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.1.  Topology Convergence Time  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     4.2.  Boot Convergence Time  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   5.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   6.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     6.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     6.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

































Ballani, et al.          Expires January 5, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               VA Performance                    July 2009


1.  Introduction

   The document "FIB Suppression with Virtual Aggregation"
   [I-D.francis-intra-va] describes how router FIB size may be reduced.
   This approach entails a trade-off between path-length and load versus
   FIB size.  This document describes the results of two independent
   studies that examine these tradeoffs.

   One of the studies is [nsdi09], published in NSDI 2009.  In this
   study, the router topology and traffic matrix of a Tier-1 ISP were
   used to model the expected performance of relatively sophisticated VA
   deployments on that Tier-1 network.  The primary results of this
   study are that FIB size could be reduced to 10% of DFZ FIB size or
   better, with a latency increase of no more than 4ms and a maximum
   load increase of <1.5%.  Further, the load increase was relatively
   uniform across the ISP's routers.  With these savings, it is
   estimated that the lifetime of routers with FIB space for only 1/4
   million IPv4 routes could easily be extended five to ten years.

   The other study [ietf74] evaluates a more straight-forward deployment
   style for VA.  This evaluation results were presented at the 74th
   IETF and are summarized in this document.  In a nutshell, the IETF
   evaluation measures the benefits that an ISP might receive under a
   relatively simpler deployment of VA.  While the NSDI evaluation makes
   assumptions on packet delivery speed and topological deployments that
   help optimize the benefits of VA, the IETF evaluation looks at a very
   intuitive and easy-to-manage deployment of VA, one that may be more
   realistic for an ISP early on.  We find that even with a very simple,
   intuitive, low-maintenance deployment of VA, the ISP we studied would
   still be able to reduce FIB sizes by 75% or more on all of its
   routers, at a cost of no more than 16ms additional delivery latency
   in the worst case.  With the use of popular prefixes, this worst-case
   latency increase could almost certainly be reduced significantly,
   though this was not studied.  In particular, routers in these POPs
   could have FIB-installed those prefixes that are reachable via the
   POP, thus avoiding the round-trip to another POP and back.

   Both studies have their limitations.  Neither study actually deployed
   VA per se---rather they modeled the effect that VA would have on an
   ISP given certain data from that ISP.  The NSDI09 study estimated
   latency by the speed of light distance between routers, and so is
   almost certainly under-estimating latency increase by a small amount.
   The IETF74 study, on the other hand, used trace-routes to estimate
   latency, and so is probably over-estimating latency increase.
   Overall, the NSDI09 reflects the best that VA could do, but might
   only be achievable after considerable deployment experience.  The
   IETF74 study, on the other hand, better reflects what an ISP might
   see in its initial, simple deployment.



Ballani, et al.          Expires January 5, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               VA Performance                    July 2009


1.1.  Terminology

   This document adopts the terminology from [I-D.francis-intra-va].
   The following terminology is additionally defined:

   Latency Increase:  In VA, routers don't maintain the entire DFZ FIB
      and hence, traffic must be routed through APRs.  This, in turn,
      increases the length of the path traversed by packets.  "Latency
      increase" is defined as the increase in latency for packets
      traversing an ISP due to the adoption of VA as compared to the
      status quo.  Note that traversal latency can have different
      meanings: the NSDI09 study uses propagation latency while the
      IETF74 uses delay measured by traceroute.
   Stretch:  Same as latency increase.
   Worst-case Latency Increase:  The maximum increase in latency for
      packets destined to any routable prefix and ingressing at any ISP
      router.
   Load Increase:  VA requires APRs to forward traffic which otherwise
      need not be routed through them.  The increase in the amount of
      traffic forwarded as a fraction of the original traffic forwarded
      by a router is termed as load increase.
   Worst-case Load Increase:  The maximum increase in load across all
      the ISP's routers.

1.2.  Temporary Sections

   This section contains temporary information, and will be removed in
   the final version.

1.2.1.  Document revisions

   This is the first document revision.


2.  The NSDI 2009 Study on FIB size versus load and stretch

   The NSDI09 paper describes and analyzes a "config-only" approach to
   deploying VA.  Specifically, it shows how VA can be deployed with
   today's legacy routers without software or protocol changes.  It has
   two types of analysis.  The first studies the trade-off between FIB
   size and stretch and load.  That analysis is presented in this
   section.  The second looks, somewhat superficially, at router
   convergence time (specifically, the time it takes for a booting
   router to fully initialize BGP).  That analysis is presented in
   Section 4.

   The NSDI09 paper describes two approaches to VA, one where control-
   plane Route Reflectors (RR) are used to filter out prefixes that need



Ballani, et al.          Expires January 5, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               VA Performance                    July 2009


   to be suppressed, and another where each data-plane router does the
   filtering at the boundary between the RIB and the routing table.  The
   latter deployment is closer to the intent of the VA internet drafts,
   but for the purpose of FIB size/load-latency performance evaluation,
   either approach applies equally.

   The core performance issue is to understand the trade-off between FIB
   size on one hand, and latency and load penalty on the other.  To
   understand this trade-off, the NSDI09 study closely modeled how VA
   would perform on a Tier-1 ISP.  The model was based on knowledge of
   the Tier-1 ISP's router-level topology including router geographic
   location, routing tables, and traffic matrix.  This information was
   obtained directly from the Tier-1 ISP.  Some additional information
   required for the study that was not directly available was inferred.
   This includes the latency between routers, which is approximated as
   the speed-of-light time for geographic distances between routers.  It
   also includes the IGP link-weights, which were also approximated
   using (the inverse of) the router distance.  Finally, queuing delay
   was not considered, though given that load increase is quite low, the
   queuing delay should not increase significantly.  Switching time at
   routers was also not considered, though again this is a relatively
   minor component of delay.  Overall, however, this study slightly
   under-estimates latency increase.

   In the study, VA was deployed in such a way that all routers can be
   APRs.  In other words, the different router roles (edge, core,
   aggregation between edge and core) were not differentiated.  As a
   result, ALL routers in the ISP see significant FIB savings.

   When deploying VA, two important questions to answer are, how are VPs
   structured, and how are APRs selected (i.e., what is the assignment
   of VP to APR)?  With regards to the first question, the distribution
   of prefixes across the VPs directly impacts the FIB size reduction
   that can be achieved.  If the VPs are structured such that they all
   have similar number of prefixes, the ISP can ensure that all its
   routers see substantial savings.  As a contrast, if some VPs have a
   lot of prefixes, one (or, a few) of the ISP's routers would need to
   maintain them which, in turn, limits the reduction in worst-case FIB
   size.

   The NSDI09 study considered two approaches.  In one, every VP is a
   \7.  This leads to 128 VPs: 0/7, 2/7, ..., 254/7, with the largest VP
   containing 22,722 prefixes or 8.9% of today's routing table.  In the
   second, the set of VPs was selected such that the number of prefixes
   in each VP is relatively uniform and each VP is larger than any real
   prefix.  This latter approach yielded 1024 VPs with the largest
   containing 4,551 prefixes or 1.78% of the BGP routing table.  In the
   rest of this section, we summarize results using the latter approach.



Ballani, et al.          Expires January 5, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               VA Performance                    July 2009


   Results using the /7 VPs can be found in the NSDI paper.  The next
   section also present results assuming /8 VPs and other simplifying
   assumptions.

   With regards to the second question, APRs were assigned using an
   automated greedy algorithm that ensures that the maximum latency
   increase for traffic to any prefix from any ISP router is below a
   specified constraint while trying to minimize the FIB size across the
   ISP's routers.

   The analysis was split into two parts, one that looks only at FIB
   size versus worst case latency increase, and another that adds
   analysis of load.  This is appropriate, because load is decreased
   simply by adding popular prefixes, which increases FIB size without
   changing worst case latency.  Note that the use of popular prefixes
   is necessary to achieve acceptable performance in this study, so the
   analysis that ignores load should not be interpreted as the numbers
   one would see in practice.

   A VA deployment such that there is an APR for every VP in each of the
   ISP's POPs is able to reduce the worst-case FIB size to 25% of the
   DFZ FIB size.  In this case, all traffic redirection is within a POP
   and hence, the stretch imposed on traffic is virtually 0.  The ISP
   can also choose to incur traffic stretch to further reduce router FIB
   requirements.  The resulting FIB versus latency analysis produced a
   range of results but there is a performance sweet-spot at the point
   where worst-case stretch is capped at 4ms.  In this case, the worst-
   case FIB size is 5% of the DMZ FIB size (in other words, 20 times
   reduction).  Capping the latency at higher values did not
   significantly shrink FIB size.

   Besides looking at percentage of FIB reduction, the paper analyzed
   how long the lifetime of current routers could extend into the future
   before running out of FIB space.  Using DMZ growth predictions based
   on growth history[atnac06], Cat6500 routers that can hold 249K IPv4
   FIB entries (and therefore could not hold full DFZ as of 2007), would
   last a decade with virtually no increased latency, and over two
   decades at 4ms increased latency.

   The above analysis, however, ignores load.  In VA, load is reduced by
   installing so-called "popular prefixes" into the FIB.  These are the
   prefixes that have the heaviest traffic volumes.  Without installing
   popular prefixes, load increases by about 40%, which is clearly
   unacceptable.

   In the Tier-1 ISP studied, 1.5% of most popular prefixes carry 75.5%
   of the traffic, while 5% of the prefixes carry 90.2% of the traffic
   (as of late-2007).  This "power-law" distribution has been the norm



Ballani, et al.          Expires January 5, 2010                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               VA Performance                    July 2009


   over many studies spanning many years.  Because of this distribution,
   installing a relatively small number of popular prefixes improves
   load tremendously.  Note too that prefixes that are popular at one
   time tend to stay popular over time.  The 5% of popular prefixes that
   produces 90% of the traffic on one day will still produce roughly 85%
   of the traffic one month later.  This means that an ISP could measure
   its popular prefixes and reconfigure its routers relatively
   infrequently---once per week or even less frequently.

   In the analysis, when 5% of most popular prefixes are installed, the
   worst-case load reduces to 1.38%.  These 5% popular prefixes add to
   the FIB size and so with a 4ms cap on the worst case latency
   increase, the actual FIB size is 10% of the total.  In other words,
   overall this Tier-1 ISP could reduce FIB size by ten times while
   increasing worst case latency by <4ms, and worst case load by <1.5%.

   Besides studying the Tier-1 ISP in detail, the NSDI09 paper also used
   Rocketfuel to make rough estimates of FIB size and latency for 9
   other ISPs (load could not be estimated because Rocketfuel does not
   have the traffic matrix of these ISPs).  Because Rocketfuel tends to
   underestimate the number of routers in an ISP, the analysis is
   conservative (more routers means more aggregate FIB over which to
   spread the routing table).  In this analysis, assuming worst case
   latency increase of 5ms, the FIB could be reduced to 5-15% of DFZ.


3.  The IETF74 Study

   While the NSDI09 results might suggest that Virtual Aggregation
   offers a great tradeoff for ISPs, the relatively management
   complexity that would result from the style of deployment used in
   that study suggests that ISPs would not see that level of performance
   in initial deployments.  The IETF74 study described here uses a much
   simpler style of VA deployment, something that better reflects what
   an ISP would use early on.  In particular, the IETF74 study considers
   ease of management when assigning APRs and virtual prefixes to use.
   As such, it better reflects the stretch/savings tradeoff they would
   actually experience if they deployed VA in their networks today.

3.1.  Evaluation Setup

   The results of a VA evaluation will depend heavily on which VA
   deployment is evaluated.  VA deployments can differ in the amount of
   VPs used, which VPs are used, how often they change, the amount of
   APRs used, the VP-APR mappings, and the placement of APRs.  These
   variables must be given values to define a particular flavor of VA
   that's being evaluated.  The NSDI study selected these variable
   values in order to maximize FIB savings and minimize additional



Ballani, et al.          Expires January 5, 2010                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               VA Performance                    July 2009


   packet latency.  This allows us to evaluate just how good the VA
   stretch/savings tradeoff could potentially be, but the variable
   values probably described a VA deployment that would not
   realistically occur.  For this study, selections of these variable
   values will be based on what we consider most simple and intuitive.
   In this subsection, we present the values we selected for these
   variables, as well as justifications for our selections.

   We start by describing where we decided to place the APRs for our
   study.  Again, our aim is for simplicity and ease of management.  The
   topology of the tier-1 ISP we used for this evaluation revealed that
   the ISP consists of a many small PoPs with a few routers, and a few
   large PoPs consisting of many routers.  While exact numbers cannot be
   revealed due to confidentiality agreements, the discrepancy between
   the number of routers in small and large PoPs is significant.  The
   discrepancy between the number of large and small PoPs was also
   significant.  Based on these observations, we decided that it would
   be intuitive to have an APR for every VP at each large PoP.
   Furthermore, only large PoPs should contain APRs, which makes them
   easy to locate.  When forwarding packets, nodes in large PoPs should
   obviously use their local APRs, while routers in small PoPs should
   use the APRs from their nearest major PoP.  Unlike the VA deployment
   used for the NSDI evaluation, APR placement does not change with the
   routing table.  This significantly reduces troubleshooting efforts
   compared to the architecture proposed by the NSDI evaluation.  We
   also had to decide how many APRs each major PoP should have.  This
   question is independent of the number of VPs an ISP decides to use.
   For example, an ISP could choose to use 8 different VPs.  However,
   the ISP could have 1 APR be responsible for all 8 VPs, or assign 2
   VPs to each of 4 different APRs, or assign 5 VPs to one APR and the
   remaining 3 to another APR, etc.  We decided that each large PoP
   would evenly distribute the FIB storage requirements amongst 8
   different APRs.  We chose 8 APRs in particular simply because each
   large PoP in our studied tier-1 ISP had at least 8 routers storing
   complete global routing tables, and these machines would have the
   storage capacities to be APRs.

   The next decision involved which virtual prefixes to use.  The more
   virtual prefixes you have, the finer the granularity for assigning
   virtual prefixes to APRs.  This increases an ISP's flexibility to
   divide FIB storage evenly amongst its different APRs, and thus keep
   worst-case FIB size at a minimum.  Of course, in order for VA to work
   properly, VPs must be longer than any real prefixes.  For these
   reasons, the NSDI study maximized the number of VPs used by looking
   at the global routing table on a certain date, and carefully adding
   virtual prefixes that were never longer than any of the real prefixes
   it covered, which yielded 1024 prefixes.  However, note that as the
   global routing table changes, the VPs used may have to change as



Ballani, et al.          Expires January 5, 2010                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               VA Performance                    July 2009


   well.  A static VP list would be much easier to manage.  Therefore,
   we decided to use VPs of length 8, which allows us to cover the v4
   space using 256 VPs.  While this number is smaller than the 1024 used
   in the NSDI study, this allows us to maintain a static VP list where
   each VP is still never longer than any of the real prefixes it
   covers.

   We have now decided on a VP list and a placement of APRs we decided
   would be simple and easy to manage.  Our final task to complete the
   description of our VA deployment was to decide which VPs to assign to
   which APRs.  In accordance to the concept of manageability, we used a
   simple and straightforward greedy algorithm for assigning virtual
   prefixes to APRs.  The aim was for this algorithm to be
   computationally cheap and quickly run at regular intervals to still
   evenly distribute FIB storage responsibilities amongst the APRs.  The
   algorithm basically assigns VPs to an APR one by one until the APR
   has VPs covering at least 1/8 of the DFZ.  We then starts assigning
   the remaining VPs to another APR.  The algorithm is as follows:

      Select one of the eight APRs
      For VPs 0/8 thru 255/8:

         Assign VP to selected APR
         If number of entries in APR > 1/8 of GRT: Select a previously
         unselected APR

   We have now assigned values to all of the variables required to
   describe a particular deployment of VA.  We can now evaluate the
   costs and benefits of this VA deployment for the ISP.

3.2.  Evaluation Results

   FIB savings for VA routers are calculated by counting the number of
   FIB entries in the VA router and comparing this to the size of the
   global routing table.

   To distribute FIB storage requirements evenly amongst the 8 different
   APRs, we ran the algorithm described above on global routing table
   contents for the first days of the months between 06/08 and 02/09.
   The algorithm, while simple, works quite well.  In the worst case, an
   APR was assigned to cover 14% of the global routing table, as opposed
   to the ideal amount of 12.5%(1/8th).

   Under VA, routers have to also store peer-to-label mapping for each
   external router that peers with the ISP.  An operator for the ISP we
   studied estimated the number of external peerings at around 20,000.

   It turns out that even with this simple deployment of VA, the largest



Ballani, et al.          Expires January 5, 2010               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               VA Performance                    July 2009


   storage requirements for an APR still reduces its FIB storage
   requirements by 75%.  For non-APR routers, FIB storage requirements
   were reduced by 93%.

   For each PoP, we calculated the worst-case stretch that a packet
   ingressing from the PoP could experience.  Stretch is defined as the
   additional time the packet takes to exit the ISP due to suboptimal
   paths introduced by the VA architecture.  Worst-case stretch occurs
   when the nearest APR for the packet is in the opposite direction of
   the egress router out of the ISP, and thus the packet is stretched a
   round-trip distance from the ingress PoP to the APR and back.

   When calculating the worst-case stretch for each PoP, we did not
   simply assume speed of light and shortest distance between PoPs as
   the NSDI evaluation did.  We wanted to capture the actual delay that
   a user would experience for the packet, which would include
   processing time as well as propagation time.  Thus we used traceroute
   to capture the true stretch experienced by packets due to VA.  To
   determine the worst case stretch for a given PoP, we tracerouted from
   this PoP to all of the major PoPs.  This allowed us to map the PoP to
   its 'nearest' major PoP.  We then used traceroute to determine the
   time it takes to go to the nearest major PoP and back, thus giving us
   the worst-case stretch for that PoP.  We did this for every PoP, and
   found that all PoPs can send a packet to a large PoP in 8ms or less,
   and thus the worst-case stretch for any PoP in our studied ISP is
   16ms.  Furthermore, 70% of PoPs experience a worst-case stretch of
   8ms or less, and over 30% of all PoPs experience no stretch at all.
   This is because they were either a major PoP, or they naturally
   defaulted to a major PoP for all of their traffic anyway, so VA did
   not change their natural delivery path whatsoever.


4.  Convergence Time

   Regarding convergence time, in general we expect convergence with VA
   to be faster than convergence without VA.  The basic argument is
   simple: updating FIB entries takes time.  If there are fewer FIB
   entries to update, then convergence goes faster.  There are two forms
   of convergence discussed here: convergence time for a given router
   when a link or some other router goes down or comes up, and time to
   fully initialize BGP when a router boots up.  We call the first
   topology-convergence, and the second boot-convergence.  Each is
   discussed in turn.

4.1.  Topology Convergence Time

   A simple experiment was run to demonstrate the improved topology-
   convergence aspect of VA.  Before discussing the experiment, it is



Ballani, et al.          Expires January 5, 2010               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               VA Performance                    July 2009


   important to note that the benefit demonstrated by this experiment
   could also be had using the "Prefix Independent Convergence"
   mechanism.  In other words, VA isn't the only way, or even the
   simplest way, to achieve this kind of fast convergence.

   The following topology was used in the experiment.


                    _.--------.
               ,--''           `---.             ,-------.
             ,'                     `.        ,-'   AS2   `-.
           ,' +----+         +----+   `.     /     +----+    \
          /   | R1 |.........| R3 |.....\...(......| R2 |     )
         /    +----+         +----+      \   \     +----+    /
        ;         \            /          :   `-.         ,-'
        |          \          /           |      `-------'
        :           \        /            ;
         \           +----+ /       AS1  /
          \          | R4 |             /
           `.        +----+           ,'
             `.                     ,'
               `---.           _.--'
                    `--------''


   Router R2 advertised a number of routes (ranging from 5000 to 220K)
   to R3, which in turn distributed them in AS1 with full-mesh iBGP.
   Packets were transmitted to R1 (via a test-box not shown) for
   destinations within the advertised routes.  At time T0, the link
   R1--R3 is taken down.  This results in a period of time during which
   some fraction of transmitted packets are dropped at R1.  The elapsed
   time until all transmitted packets are successfully received at R2 is
   then measured.

   The following table shows the elapsed time for a varying number of
   advertised routes, for both with VA and without VA.















Ballani, et al.          Expires January 5, 2010               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft               VA Performance                    July 2009


       Number of  |   With   |  Without |
        Routes    |    VA    |    VA    |
     =============|==========|==========|
         5000     |  2 sec   |  2 sec   |
     -------------|----------|----------|
        50000     |  2 sec   |  10 sec  |
     -------------|----------|----------|
       100000     |  2 sec   |  17 sec  |
     -------------|----------|----------|
       150000     |  3 sec   |  24 sec  |
     -------------|----------|----------|
       200000     |  3 sec   |  30 sec  |
     -------------|----------|----------|
       220000     |  3 sec   |  35 sec  |
     -------------|----------|----------|


   As can be seen from the table, convergence time for the VA scenario
   is pretty much independent of routing table size.  This is because
   the only change in the FIB is that of the best igp next-hop to the
   APR.  In the non-VA case, however, the igp next-hop needs to be
   changed for all prefixes before routes to all prefixes converge.

   It should be noted that this experiment intentionally puts VA
   topology-convergence in the best light.  Router R1 only has a single
   FIB entry that it needs to update: that of the VP.  In practice, any
   given router may have both VP sub-prefixes (those needed by virtue of
   being an APR) and popular prefixes in the FIB.  Certainly at least
   the new next-hops to the VP sub-prefixes and VPs would have to be
   FIB-installed before convergence.  Realistically, however, the
   popular prefixes should be installed too, since until they are load
   is increased.  Therefore, in practice the improvement in convergence
   time will be less than shown here.

4.2.  Boot Convergence Time

   The NSDI09 paper [nsdi09] experimented with the time it takes for a
   router to boot and fully populate its routing tables and advertise
   all updates (i.e. initialize BGP).  It is important to note that the
   NSDI09 paper did not implement the VA draft [I-D.francis-intra-va]
   per se.  Rather it deployed VA using legacy routers configured to
   implement VA.  In fact, the NSDI09 paper experimented with two
   distinct configurations of VA.  In one, control-plane Route
   Reflectors (RR) were used to filter out the prefixes not needed by
   data-plane routers (i.e. prefixes that could be FIB-suppressed
   according to the rules of VA).  In this setting, both the RIBs and
   FIBs of data-plane routers were shrunk.




Ballani, et al.          Expires January 5, 2010               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft               VA Performance                    July 2009


   The second configuration approach better reflects the spirit of the
   VA draft.  Here, data-plane routers ran BGP as normal (i.e. the RIBs
   were populated more-or-less as they would be in the absence of VA),
   and did FIB-suppression by setting the administrative distance for
   suppressible prefixes to 255.  In the Cisco routers used in the
   experiment, such prefixes were then FIB-suppressed, but otherwise
   treated normally.

   In the test setup, the VA routers' FIBs held roughly 1/2 of the full
   DFZ.  VA as deployed with control-plane RRs was able to initialize
   BGP about twice as fast as regular (full DFZ) routers (for example,
   124 seconds versus 273 seconds).  With the "admin-distance = 255"
   approach, it took roughly twice as long for the VA routers to
   initialize compared to the regular routers (for example, 487 seconds
   versus 273 seconds).  The reason for this is that these Cisco routers
   were not designed to deal with large admin-distance access lists
   efficiently.  We believe that this inefficiency can be overcome, but
   in fact there are at this time no hard numbers to back up this
   supposition.


5.  Acknowledgements

   Tuan Cao, a PhD student at Cornell, did much of the heavy lifting on
   the NSDI09 measurement study.


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.francis-intra-va]
              Francis, P., Xu, X., Ballani, H., Jen, D., Raszuk, R., and
              L. Zhang, "FIB Suppression with Virtual Aggregation",
              draft-francis-intra-va-01 (work in progress), April 2009.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

6.2.  Informative References

   [atnac06]  Huston, G. and G. Armitage, "Projection Future IPv4 Router
              Requirements from Trends in Dynamic BGP Behaviour", ATNAC
              2006 caia.swin.edu.au/pubs/ATNAC06/Huston_1m.pdf,
              December 2006.

   [ietf74]   Jen, D., "Scaling FIBs with Virtual Aggregation: How Much
              Stretch? How Much FIB savings?", IRTF Routing Research



Ballani, et al.          Expires January 5, 2010               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft               VA Performance                    July 2009


              Group Meeting http://www.ietf.org/proceedings/09mar/
              slides/RRG-2.pdf, March 2009.

   [nsdi09]   Ballani, H., Francis, P., Cao, T., and J. Wang, "Making
              Routers Last Longer with ViAggre", ACM Usenix NSDI 2009 ht
              tp://www.usenix.org/events/nsdi09/tech/full_papers/
              ballani/ballani.pdf, April 2009.


Authors' Addresses

   Hitesh Ballani
   Cornell University
   4130 Upson Hall
   Ithaca, NY  14853
   US

   Phone: +1 607 279 6780
   Email: hitesh@cs.cornell.edu


   Paul Francis
   Max Planck Institute for Software Systems
   Gottlieb-Daimler-Strasse
   Kaiserslautern  67633
   Germany

   Phone: +49 631 930 39600
   Email: francis@mpi-sws.org


   Dan Jen
   UCLA
   4805 Boelter Hall
   Los Angeles, CA  90095
   US

   Phone:
   Email: jenster@cs.ucla.edu












Ballani, et al.          Expires January 5, 2010               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft               VA Performance                    July 2009


   Xiaohu Xu
   Huawei Technologies
   No.3 Xinxi Rd., Shang-Di Information Industry Base, Hai-Dian District
   Beijing, Beijing  100085
   P.R.China

   Phone: +86 10 82836073
   Email: xuxh@huawei.com


   Lixia Zhang
   UCLA
   3713 Boelter Hall
   Los Angeles, CA  90095
   US

   Phone:
   Email: lixia@cs.ucla.edu

































Ballani, et al.          Expires January 5, 2010               [Page 16]


