A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 2961

        Title:      RSVP Refresh Overhead Reduction Extensions
        Author(s):  L. Berger, D. Gan, G. Swallow, P. Pan, F. Tommasi,
                    S. Molendini
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       April 2001
        Mailbox:    lberger@labn.net, dhg@juniper.net,
                    swallow@cisco.com, pingpan@juniper.net, 
                    franco.tommasi@unile.it, molendini@ultra5.unile.it
        Pages:      34
        Characters: 81675
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-rsvp-refresh-reduct-05.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc2961.txt


This document describes a number of mechanisms that can be used to
reduce processing overhead requirements of refresh messages, eliminate
the state synchronization latency incurred when an RSVP (Resource
ReserVation Protocol) message is lost and, when desired, refreshing
state without the transmission of whole refresh messages.  The same
extensions also support reliable RSVP message delivery on a per hop
basis.  These extension present no backwards compatibility issues.

This document is a prodcut of the Resource Reservation Setup Protocol
Working Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited. 

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
