 



INTERNET-DRAFT                                                R. Housley
Intended Status: Informational                            Vigil Security
Obsoletes: 1150 (once approved)                                         
Expires: 24 October 2011                                   22 April 2011

                  FYI on FYI: No Additional FYI Notes
                     <draft-iesg-rfc1150bis-00.txt>

Abstract

   The FYIs (For Your Information) sub-series of RFCs was used by the
   IETF User Services Area, which no longer exists.  The IESG does not
   intend to make any further additions to the FYI sub-series.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 24 October 2011.

Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



 


Housley                                                         [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                             21 April 2011


1.  No Further Additions to the FYI Sub-series

   The FYI (For Your Information) sub-series of RFCs was established by
   RFC 1150 [RFC1150].  The FYI sub-series was used by the IETF User
   Services Area, which has not met since IETF 53.  The IESG does not
   intend to make any further additions to the FYI sub-series.

   The FYI sub-series was designed to provide Internet users with a
   central repository of Internet information.  Many Informational RFCs
   have been published that are not part of the FYI sub-series.  The
   IESG intends to continue publishing Informational RFCs; however, none
   of them will carry a FYI sub-series number.

   If a future RFC is published that obsoletes an existing member of the
   FYI sub-series, the new RFC will not be assigned an FYI number.

2.  RFC 1150 Moved to Historic

   This document moves RFC 1150 [RFC1150] to Historic.  The procedural
   information in RFC 1150 is no longer valid.  If it becomes desirable
   to make additions to the FYI sub-series in the future, new procedures
   can be developed to replace this document.

3.  Security Considerations

   No Internet security issues are anticipated by the actions described
   in this document.

4.  IANA Considerations

   No IANA actions are needed.

   {{{ RFC Editor: Please delete this section prior to publication. }}}

5.  Normative Reference

   [RFC1150]  Malkin, G. and J. Reynolds, "FYI on FYI: Introduction to
              the FYI Notes", FYI 1, RFC 1150, March 1990.

Author's Address

   Russell Housley
   Vigil Security, LLC
   918 Spring Knoll Drive
   Herndon, VA 20170
   USA
   EMail: housley@vigilsec.com




Housley                                                         [Page 2]
