



INTERNET-DRAFT                                                R. Housley
Intended Status: Informational                            Vigil Security
Obsoletes: 1150 (once approved)
Expires: 6 December 2011                                     6 June 2011

                    Conclusion of FYI RFC Sub-series
                     <draft-iesg-rfc1150bis-01.txt>

Abstract

   This document concludes the For Your Information (FYI) sub-series of
   RFCs, established by RFC 1150 for use by the IETF User Services Area,
   which no longer exists.  The IESG does not intend to make any further
   additions to this RFC sub-series, and this document provides a record
   of this decision.  This document also obsoletes RFC 1150 and changes
   the status of RFC 1150 to Historic.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 6 December 2011.

Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Housley                                                         [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                               6 June 2011


1.  Background

   The FYI (For Your Information) sub-series of RFCs was established by
   RFC 1150 [RFC1150] in 1990 for use by the IETF User Services Area,
   which has not met since IETF 53 in March 2001.  This RFC sub-series
   was designed to provide Internet users with a repository of
   information that regarding the Internet and might be interesting to
   wide range of people.

   The publication of RFC 1150 [RFC1150] introduced the FYI sub-series
   of RFCs.  Since that time, a total of 38 FYI numbers have been
   assigned.  Many other Informational RFCs have been published that are
   not part of the FYI sub-series.

   The list of documents in the FYI sub-series can be found on the RFC
   Editor web site at [INDEX].

2.  Conclusion of the FYI Sub-series

   The IESG does not intend to make any further additions to the FYI
   sub-series.  The IESG intends to continue publishing Informational
   RFCs, but none of them will be assigned an FYI number.

   All published RFCs which currently are a part of FYI sub-series
   retain their FYI number.  The FYI numbers continue to provide a
   reference point for these documents, and the FYI number should be
   used in citations to these documents.

   If a future RFC is published that obsoletes an existing member of the
   FYI sub-series, the new RFC will not be assigned an FYI number.

3.  RFC 1150 Moved to Historic

   This document moves RFC 1150 [RFC1150] to Historic.  The procedural
   information in RFC 1150 is no longer valid.  If it becomes desirable
   to make additions to the FYI sub-series in the future, new procedures
   can be developed to replace this document.

4.  Security Considerations

   No Internet security issues are anticipated by the actions described
   in this document.

5.  IANA Considerations

   No IANA actions are needed.

   {{{ RFC Editor: Please delete this section prior to publication. }}}



Housley                                                         [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT                                               6 June 2011


6.  References

6.1. Normative References

   [RFC1150]  Malkin, G. and J. Reynolds, "FYI on FYI: Introduction to
              the FYI Notes", FYI 1, RFC 1150, March 1990.

6.2.  Informative References

   [INDEX]    http://www.rfc-editor.org/fyi-index.html

Author's Address

   Russell Housley
   Vigil Security, LLC
   918 Spring Knoll Drive
   Herndon, VA 20170
   USA
   EMail: housley@vigilsec.com
































Housley                                                         [Page 3]
