





Network Working Group                                        R. Aggarwal
Internet Draft                                          Juniper Networks
Intended status: Standards Track
Expires: August 2010                                          Y. Rekhter
                                                        Juniper Networks

                                                                T. Morin
                                                          France Telecom

                                                           W. Henderickx
                                                          Alcatel-Lucent

                                                                P. Muley
                                                          Alcatel-Lucent

                                                                  R. Qiu
                                                                  Huawei

                                                       February 22, 2010


                  Extranet in BGP Multicast VPN (MVPN)


             draft-raggarwa-l3vpn-bgp-mvpn-extranet-03.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.






Raggarwa                                                        [Page 1]


Internet Draftdraft-raggarwa-l3vpn-bgp-mvpn-extranet-03.txtFebruary 2010


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Abstract

   This document describes clarifications and extensions to the
   procedures in [BGP-MVPN] for supporting extranets. The procedures
   specified in this document assume that BGP is used for transmission
   of MVPN customers' multicast routing information within the service
   provider(s) infrastructure.




























Raggarwa                                                        [Page 2]


Internet Draftdraft-raggarwa-l3vpn-bgp-mvpn-extranet-03.txtFebruary 2010


Table of Contents

 1          Specification of requirements  .........................   3
 2          Introduction  ..........................................   4
 3          Extranet Service Model  ................................   4
 4          Routing Exchange in Support of Extranets  ..............   5
 4.1        Exchange of Unicast Routes  ............................   5
 4.2        Exchange of Source Active and S-PMSI auto-discovery routes 6
 4.3        Exchange of I-PMSI auto-discovery routes  ..............   6
 5          Originating C-multicast routes  ........................   7
 6          Multicast Extranet over Selective P-tunnels  ...........   7
 6.1        Non-aggregated S-PMSIs  ................................   7
 6.2        Aggregated S-PMSIs  ....................................   7
 7          Multicast Extranet over Inclusive P-tunnels  ...........   8
 7.1        Option 1  ..............................................   8
 7.2        Option 2  ..............................................   8
 7.3        Option 3  ..............................................   9
 7.4        Option 4  ..............................................  10
 8          Multiple Extranet VRFs on the same PE  .................  11
 9          IANA Considerations  ...................................  11
10          Security Considerations  ...............................  11
11          Acknowledgements  ......................................  11
12          References  ............................................  12
12.1        Normative References  ..................................  12
12.2        Informative References  ................................  12
13          Authors' Addresses  ....................................  12






1. Specification of requirements

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].









Raggarwa                                                        [Page 3]


Internet Draftdraft-raggarwa-l3vpn-bgp-mvpn-extranet-03.txtFebruary 2010


2. Introduction

   The extranet functionality that allows a MVPN site to receive/send
   multicast traffic from/to sites of other MVPNs is a requirement of
   RFC4834 [RFC4834] (section 5.1.6).

   This document describes clarifications and extensions to the
   procedures in [BGP-MVPN] for supporting extranets. The procedures
   described in this document assume that BGP is used for transmission
   of MVPN customers' multicast routing information within the service
   provider(s) infrastructure [BGP-MVPN].


3. Extranet Service Model

   In the context of MVPN the term "extranet" refers to the ability for
   multicast sources in one MVPN to send multicast traffic to multicast
   receivers in other MVPN(s), and likewise, the ability for multicast
   receivers in one MVPN to receive multicast traffic from multicast
   sources in other MVPN(s). Such multicast sources are referred to as
   "extranet sources". The multicast groups to which the extranet
   sources generate traffic are referred to as "extranet groups". The
   receivers that receive multicast traffic from extranet sources are
   referred to as "extranet receivers".

   If a given VRF has (multicast) receivers behind attached CEs that can
   receive multicast traffic sourced in the configured set of extranet
   MVPNs, then the (unicast) addresses of these sources MUST be
   unambiguous both among these extranet MVPNs, as well as between any
   of these extranet MVPNs and the MVPN of the VRF.

   Moreover, if a given VRF has (multicast) receivers behind attached
   CEs that can receive multicast traffic sourced in the configured set
   of extranet MVPNs, then the group addresses within the ASM range that
   these receivers can join MUST be unambiguous both among these
   extranet MVPNs, as well as between any of these extranet MVPNs and
   the MVPN of the VRF.














Raggarwa                                                        [Page 4]


Internet Draftdraft-raggarwa-l3vpn-bgp-mvpn-extranet-03.txtFebruary 2010


4. Routing Exchange in Support of Extranets

   If a given VRF has (multicast) receivers behind attached CEs that can
   receive multicast traffic sourced in the configured set of extranet
   MVPNs, then this VRF MUST be able to import the "necessary" unicast
   and BGP MVPN auto-discovery routes advertised by other PEs for the
   MVPNs that contain the extranet sources.

   The "necessary" routes are the routes required by the VRF to receive
   multicast traffic for the extranet sources and groups from other
   MVPNs.  This includes unicast VPN-IP routes to the extranet sources,
   as well as BGP MVPN Source Active auto-discovery routes for the
   extranet sources and groups.  It also includes Intra-AS, Inter-AS and
   S-PMSI auto-discovery routes that carry P-Tunnel attributes for the
   P-Tunnels used by the other MVPNs for sending multicast traffic for
   multicast sources and groups.


4.1. Exchange of Unicast Routes

   Case 1: PIM-SM in SSM mode. To fit the SSM model, if a given (C-S, C-
   G) is in the extranet, then C-S should be in the extranet as well (or
   to be more precise, the VPN-IP route to C-S has to be advertised in
   the extranet).

   Case 2: PIM-SM in ASM mode. To fit the ASM model, if a given C-G is
   in the extranet, then the C-RP for that C-G and all the C-Ss sending
   to that C-G should be in the extranet as well (or to be more precise,
   all the VPN-IP routes to C-RP and these C-Ss have to advertised in
   the extranet). Note that for a given C-G that is part of the extranet
   formed by several MVPNs, C-Ss for that C-G may be present in any of
   these MVPNs.

   For both ASM and SSM modes, the VRFs connected to the sites that have
   extranet receivers for a given extranet source MUST be able to import
   a VPN-IP route to that source. In addition, for the ASM mode the VRFs
   connected to the sites that have extranet receivers for a given
   extranet group MUST be able to import a VPN-IP route to the C-RP of
   that extranet group.












Raggarwa                                                        [Page 5]


Internet Draftdraft-raggarwa-l3vpn-bgp-mvpn-extranet-03.txtFebruary 2010


4.2. Exchange of Source Active and S-PMSI auto-discovery routes

   When all the VPN-IP routes originated by the same VRF carry the same
   set of RTs, then as long as the Source Active auto-discovery routes
   and S-PMSI auto-discovery routes use the default setting for their
   RTs (as specified in [BGP-MVPN]), setting up the appropriate RTs for
   the VPN-IP routes, would also result in the appropriate import of
   Source Active auto-discovery routes and S-PMSI auto-discovery routes.

   When different VPN-IP routes originated by the same VRF carry
   different RTs, then the following rules result in the appropriate
   import of Source Active auto-discovery routes and S-PMSI auto-
   discovery routes:

     + By default a Source Active auto-discovery route for a given (C-S,
       C-G) MUST carry the same RT(s) as the VPN-IP route for C-S.

     + By default an S-PMSI auto-discovery route for a given (C-S, C-G)
       or (C-S, C-*) MUST carry the same RT(s) as the VPN-IP route for
       C-S.

     + By default an S-PMSI auto-discovery route for a given (C-*, C-G)
       MUST carry the same RT(s) as the VPN-IP route(s) for the
       multicast sources that are in the sites connected to that VRF and
       that originate (multicast) traffic for that C-G.


4.3. Exchange of I-PMSI auto-discovery routes

   A VRF connected to the site(s) that have extranet receivers for a
   given extranet source MUST be able to import the I-PMSI auto-
   discovery route originated by the VRF connected to the source.  Note
   that as long as the I-PMSI auto-discovery routes use the default
   setting for their RTs (as specified in [BGP-MVPN]), setting up the
   appropriate RTs for the VPN-IP routes, would also result in the
   appropriate import of I-PMSI auto-discovery routes.


   If a given VRF connected to a given extranet source uses P2MP RSVP-TE
   as an inclusive P-tunnel to carry (multicast) traffic from that
   source, then the RT(s) carried by the I-PMSI auto-discovery routes
   originated by the VRFs connected to the sites that have the extranet
   receivers for that source, and the import RT(s) of the VRF connected
   to the (extranet) source MUST be such that these routes will be
   imported into that VRF.






Raggarwa                                                        [Page 6]


Internet Draftdraft-raggarwa-l3vpn-bgp-mvpn-extranet-03.txtFebruary 2010


5. Originating C-multicast routes

   Procedures specified in section "Constructing the rest of the C-
   multicast route" of [BGP-MVPN] are modified as follows.  If the local
   and the upstream PEs are in different ASes, then the local PE has to
   find in its VRF not just an Inter-AS I-PMSI A-D route whose Source AS
   field carries the autonomous system number of the upstream PE (as
   specified in section 11.1.3 of [BGP-MVPN]), but an Inter-AS I-PMSI A-
   D route whose Source AS field carries the autonomous system number of
   the upstream PE, and whose RTs form a non-empty intersection with the
   RTs carried in the VPN-IP route imported into that VRF for the
   address carried in the Multicast Source field of MCAST-VPN NLRI.


6. Multicast Extranet over Selective P-tunnels

   In the following we consider only the S-PMSI auto-discovery routes
   used for the extranets.


6.1. Non-aggregated S-PMSIs

   When each S-PMSI auto-discovery routes originated from a VRF on a
   given PE advertises a distinct P-tunnel in the PMSI Tunnel attribute,
   the procedures in [BGP-MVPN], along with the routing exchange
   clarifications described above, are sufficient to support the
   scenario when the multicast extranet traffic is carried over
   selective P-tunnels (P-tunnels advertised by the S-PMSI auto-
   discovery routes).

   An implementation MUST support multicast extranets with non-
   aggregated S-PMSIs.


6.2. Aggregated S-PMSIs

   When multiple S-PMSI auto-discovery routes originated from a VRF on a
   given PE advertise the same P-tunnel in the PMSI Tunnel attribute,
   and each such route also advertises a distinct (upstream assigned)
   label in the attribute, then the procedures in [BGP-MVPN], along with
   the routing exchange clarifications described above, are sufficient.

   When multiple S-PMSI auto-discovery routes originated from a VRF on a
   given PE advertise the same P-tunnel in the PMSI Tunnel attribute,
   and the PMSI Tunnel attribute of each of these routes does not carry
   a distinct (upstream assigned) label per route, then in addition to
   the procedures in [BGP-MVPN] and the routing exchange clarifications
   described above, the following is required.



Raggarwa                                                        [Page 7]


Internet Draftdraft-raggarwa-l3vpn-bgp-mvpn-extranet-03.txtFebruary 2010


   When the local PE receives from some other PE (C-S, C-G) traffic on a
   P-tunnel that the other PE advertised in an S-PMSI auto-discovery
   route that has been imported into a VRF on the local PE, the local PE
   performs procedures specified in section 12.3 of [BGP-MVPN] only if:
   (1) the VRF does contain an S-PMSI auto-discovery route for (C-S, C-
   G), and (2) the (C-S, C-G) traffic is received on the P-tunnel
   advertised in the PMSI Tunnel attribute of that route, and (3) RTs of
   that route form a non-empty intersection with the RTs carried in the
   VPN-IP route for C-S imported into that VRF. Otherwise, if at least
   one of the above conditions is false, the local PE MUST discard (and
   not forward) this traffic.

   An implementation SHOULD support multicast extranets with aggregated
   S-PMSI.


7. Multicast Extranet over Inclusive P-tunnels

   There are (at least) four possible ways to support extranet multicast
   over inclusive P-tunnels.


7.1. Option 1

   This option assumes that the set of the extranet sources within a
   given VRF is the same as the set of the multicast sources within that
   VRF.

   Procedures in [BGP-MVPN], along with the routing exchange
   clarifications described above, are sufficient to support this
   option.

   An implementation MUST support this option.


7.2. Option 2

   Each VRF that has set of extranet sources being part of that VRF uses
   not one, but two inclusive P-tunnels for sending multicast traffic.
   The first one is used for sending multicast traffic from the non-
   extranet sources; the second is used for sending multicast traffic
   from the extranet sources.

   Each of these P-tunnels is advertised by its own I-PMSI auto-
   discovery route. Therefore, these two routes MUST NOT use the same
   RD. The distribution scope of the second route SHOULD include all the
   VRFs that are within the scope of the first route, plus all the other
   VRFs that have the extranet receivers for the extranet sources of the



Raggarwa                                                        [Page 8]


Internet Draftdraft-raggarwa-l3vpn-bgp-mvpn-extranet-03.txtFebruary 2010


   VRF that originates the route.  Thus the P-tunnel advertised by the
   second route spans all the VRFs spanned by the P-tunnel advertised by
   the first route, plus all the VRFs that have the extranet receivers
   for the extranet sources of the VRF that originates the route.

   The set of RTs carried by the first I-PMSI auto-discovery route
   follows the rules specified in [BGP-MVPN]. The set of RTs carried by
   the second I-PMSI auto-discovery route MUST form a non-empty
   intersection with the RTs carried by the VPN-IP routes for the
   extranet multicast sources in the VRF that originates the route.

   To carry (C-S, C-G) multicast traffic the PE by default should use
   the P-tunnel that the PE advertises in the I-PMSI auto-discovery
   route that has the same set of RTs as the VPN-IP route to C-S
   advertised by the PE.

   When the local PE receives from other PEs (multicast) traffic
   corresponding to the (multicast) state advertised in the C-multicast
   route originated from given VRF on the local PE, the PE MUST discard
   (and not forward) this traffic if it was received on a P-tunnel that
   is advertised by an I-PMSI auto-discovery route that has been
   imported into the VRF, and whose RTs form an empty intersection with
   the RTs carried in the VPN-IP route imported into that VRF for the
   address carried in the Multicast Source field of MCAST-VPN NLRI.
   Note that this check is in addition to the checks specified in
   section 9.1 of [MVPN-ARCH].

   An implementation SHOULD support this option.


7.3. Option 3

   Each VRF has just one inclusive P-tunnel that is used to send data
   originated by the sites connected to that VRF. In this case if the
   set of extranet multicast sources are part of that VRF, then all
   other VRFs that are part of the extranet must be able to receive data
   on that P-tunnel (all these VRFs must be able import the I-PMSI auto-
   discovery route that advertises this P-tunnel).

   In addition to the rules specified in [BGP-MVPN], the set of RTs
   carried by the I-PMSI auto-discovery route that advertises this P-
   tunnel MUST form a non-empty intersection with the RTs carried by the
   VPN-IP routes for the extranet multicast sources in that VRF.

   Moreover, with this option the set of RTs of the I-PMSI auto-
   discovery routes originated by the VRFs that contain extranet
   multicast sources MUST be the same as in the absence of the extranet.
   The route import policy for both intra-AS and inter-AS I-PMSI auto-



Raggarwa                                                        [Page 9]


Internet Draftdraft-raggarwa-l3vpn-bgp-mvpn-extranet-03.txtFebruary 2010


   discovery routes on the VRFs that have receivers for the (multicast)
   traffic originated by these sources MUST be such that these VRF MUST
   be able to import these routes.

   A VRF that is receiving traffic on an inclusive P-tunnel from the
   extranet sources connected to another VRF may also receive on that P-
   tunnel the non-extranet traffic from that VRF. Such traffic will be
   dropped by the receiving VRF anyway if it doesn't have (C-S, C-G) or
   (C-*, C-G) forwarding state for this non-extranet traffic.  However,
   the receiving VRF may have forwarding state for such traffic if the
   address space for the non-extranet sources connected to the sending
   VRF overlaps with the address space of the sources in the receiving
   VRF's MVPN. To take care of this case the receiving VRF MUST be able
   to drop the non-extranet traffic if it arrives on the unexpected P-
   Tunnel. The following describes how the unexpected P-Tunnel is
   determined.

   When the local PE receives from other PEs (multicast) traffic
   corresponding to the (multicast) state advertised in the C-multicast
   route originated from given VRF on the local PE, the PE MUST discard
   (and not forward) this traffic if it was received on a P-tunnel that
   is advertised by an I-PMSI auto-discovery route that has been
   imported into the VRF, and whose RTs form an empty intersection with
   the RTs carried in the VPN-IP route imported into that VRF for the
   address carried in the Multicast Source field of MCAST-VPN NLRI.
   Note that this check is in addition to the checks specified in
   section 9.1 of [MVPN-ARCH].


   An implementation SHOULD support this option.


7.4. Option 4

   Each VRF that has set of extranet multicast sources being part of
   that VRF is a root of as many inclusive P-tunnels as the number of
   MVPNs in the extranet. A given (C-S, C-G) multicast traffic has to be
   sent over each of these P-tunnels. From the point of view of the
   number of P-tunnels, and the amount of replication required this is
   the least desirable option, and is included here just for the sake of
   completeness.










Raggarwa                                                       [Page 10]


Internet Draftdraft-raggarwa-l3vpn-bgp-mvpn-extranet-03.txtFebruary 2010


8. Multiple Extranet VRFs on the same PE

   When multiple VRFs that contain extranet receivers for a given
   extranet source are present on the same PE, this PE becomes a single
   leaf of the P-tunnel used for sending (multicast) traffic from that
   source to these extranet receivers. Specific procedures for
   replicating this traffic on that PE to these multiple VRFs are a
   purely local to the PE matter, and thus are out of the scope of this
   document.

   For a given extranet the site(s) that contain the extranet source(s)
   and the site(s) that contain the extranet receiver(s) may be
   connected to the same PE.  In this scenario the procedures by which
   (multicast) traffic from these sources is delivered to these
   receivers is purely local matter to the PE matter, and thus are
   outside the scope of this document.

   An implementation MUST support multiple extranet VRFs on a PE.


9. IANA Considerations

   This document does not impose any new IANA considerations.



10. Security Considerations

   A VRF must be able to drop non-extranet traffic, if it receives such
   traffic from another PE. The procedures for dropping such traffic are
   described in this document.



11. Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Eric Rosen for his comments.














Raggarwa                                                       [Page 11]


Internet Draftdraft-raggarwa-l3vpn-bgp-mvpn-extranet-03.txtFebruary 2010


12. References

12.1. Normative References

   [RFC2119] "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
   Levels.", Bradner, March 1997

   [MVPN-ARCH] E. Rosen, R. Aggarwal [Editors], "Multicast in MPLS/BGP
   IP VPNs", draft-ietf-l3vpn-2547bis-mcast, work in progress

   [BGP-MVPN], R. Aggarwal, E. Rosen,  T. Morin, Y. Rekhter, "BGP
   Encodings for Multicast in MPLS/BGP IP VPNs", draft-ietf-
   l3vpn-2547bis-mcast-bgp, work in progress



12.2. Informative References

   [RFC4834] T. Morin, Ed., "Requirements for Multicast in L3 Provider-
   Provisioned VPNs", RFC 4834, April 2007



13. Authors' Addresses

   Rahul Aggarwal
   Juniper Networks
   1194 North Mathilda Ave.
   Sunnyvale, CA 94089
   Email: rahul@juniper.net

   Yakov Rekhter
   Juniper Networks
   1194 North Mathilda Ave.
   Sunnyvale, CA 94089
   Email: yakov@juniper.net

   Thomas Morin
   France Telecom - Orange Labs
   2, avenue Pierre-Marzin
   22307 Lannion Cedex
   France
   Email: thomas.morin@orange-ftgroup.com

   Wim Henderickx
   Alcatel-Lucent
   e-mail: wim.henderickx@alcatel-lucent.be




Raggarwa                                                       [Page 12]


Internet Draftdraft-raggarwa-l3vpn-bgp-mvpn-extranet-03.txtFebruary 2010


   Praveen Muley
   Alcatel-Lucent
   e-mail: Praveen.Muley@alcatel-lucent.com

   Ray (Lei) Qiu
   2330 Central Expressway
   Santa Clara, CA 95050
   USA
   e-mail: rayq@huawei.com










































Raggarwa                                                       [Page 13]


