


Network Working Group                                     Christian Vogt
Internet-Draft                                                  Ericsson
Expires: April 29, 2010                                     Alain Durand
                                                                 Comcast
                                                        October 26, 2009


            Virtual IPv6 Connectivity for IPv4-Only Networks
             draft-vogt-durand-virtual-ip6-connectivity-03

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  This document may contain material
   from IETF Documents or IETF Contributions published or made publicly
   available before November 10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the
   copyright in some of this material may not have granted the IETF
   Trust the right to allow modifications of such material outside the
   IETF Standards Process.  Without obtaining an adequate license from
   the person(s) controlling the copyright in such materials, this
   document may not be modified outside the IETF Standards Process, and
   derivative works of it may not be created outside the IETF Standards
   Process, except to format it for publication as an RFC or to
   translate it into languages other than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 29, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




Vogt & Durand            Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Virtual IPv6 Connectivity           October 2009


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   Although the impetus to invest in interworking between IP versions 4
   and 6 is initially on the side of early IPv6 adopters, more
   substantial IPv6 deployment in the future will shift this impetus
   towards the side of the legacy IPv4 Internet.  However, interworking
   techniques for IPv4-only networks are as yet largely unexplored.
   This document proposes Virtual IPv6 Connectivity, a technique for
   IPv4-only networks to communicate with the IPv6 Internet.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Conceptual Overview  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Virtual IP Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Discovery of Virtual IP Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  IP Protocol Translation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   6.  Multi-Homing Support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   7.  Side-Effects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   8.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   9.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   10. Acknowledgment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
   11. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   Appendix A.  Pending Document Changes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   Appendix B.  Log of Document Changes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24


















Vogt & Durand            Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Virtual IPv6 Connectivity           October 2009


1.  Introduction

   The deployment of IP version 6 is challenging.  Since it requires
   changes to applications, host stacks, and networks end-to-end, IPv6
   deployment involves multiple stakeholders.  These stakeholders are in
   general independent and not coordinated, so a simultaneously
   transition to IPv6 by all stakeholders is practically impossible.  It
   is therefore necessary to enable the stakeholders to deploy IPv6
   independently of each other.  This requires interworking between
   those stakeholders who have already adopted IPv6, and those
   stakeholders who have not yet.

   There are two basic approaches to enable interworking between IP
   versions:

   o  Make IPv6 backwards compatible with IPv4

   o  Make IPv4 forward compatible with IPv6

   Which of the approaches is feasible depends on where the impetus on
   interworking is -- on the side of early IPv6 adopters, or on the side
   of the legacy IPv4 Internet.  This impetus will shift over time.
   Initially, the impetus for interworking will naturally be high on the
   side of early IPv6 adopters.  Services and peers will at that point
   almost exclusively be IPv4-only, so IPv6 adopters will have to make
   sure they can communicate via IPv4.  For the same reason, initial
   incentives to invest in interworking will be very low on the side of
   the legacy IPv4 Internet: Why would the legacy IPv4 Internet want to
   communicate via IPv6 if everything they need is available also via
   IPv4?

   However, as IPv6 deployment progresses, more and more services and
   peers will become IPv6-capable.  The interworking impetus on the side
   of IPv6 adopters will therefore shrink.  At some point, a critical
   mass of IPv6 deployment will have been reached to make it feasible
   for services and peers to be IPv6-only.  And as there are more and
   more IPv6-only services and peers, the impetus for interworking will
   grow on the side of the legacy IPv4 Internet, so that those IPv6-only
   services and peers can be reached.

   Consequently, interworking between IP versions will initially be
   realized foremost through backwards compatibility of IPv6 with IPv4,
   but over time increasinly also through forward compatibilility of
   IPv4 with IPv6.  Due to the immediate need for IPv6 backwards
   compatibility, the Internet Engineering Task Force has made the
   design of suitable techniques a task of high priority.  However,
   techniques for IPv4 forward compatibility are as yet largely
   unexplored.



Vogt & Durand            Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Virtual IPv6 Connectivity           October 2009


   This document proposes Virtual IPv6 Connectivity, a technique to make
   IPv4 forward compatible with IPv6.  Virtual IPv6 Connectivity uses IP
   protocol translators on the border of IPv4-only networks to enable
   local hosts to communicate with IPv6-only peers on the Internet.  It
   makes IPv4-only hosts reachable by peers on the Internet via "virtual
   IPv6 addresses", and it makes IPv6-only peers reachable by IPv4-only
   hosts via "virtual IPv4 addresses".  A virtual IPv6 address is
   statically mapped to each IPv4 address, and made retrievable via the
   DNS or DNSSEC.  A virtual IPv4 address is mapped to a peer's IPv6
   address dynamically and on demand, and made retrievable via DNS
   proxies or DNSSEC proxies.  The IP protocol translators can
   alternatively be operated by IPv4-only networks directly, or by
   providers on behalf of IPv4-only networks.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2.  Conceptual Overview

   To enable hosts in an IPv4-only network to communicate with remote
   IPv6 peers, Virtual IPv6 Connectivity employs four components:

   o  Virtual IPv4 and IPv6 addresses to represent, respectively, the
      IPv6 addresses of remote peers to local IPv4-only hosts, and the
      IPv4 addresses of local hosts to remote IPv6 peers.

   o  IP protocol translators, placed on border links of the IPv4-only
      network, to translate packets exchanged with remote IPv6 peers.

   o  Support in authoritative DNS servers for returning virtual IPv6
      addresses in place of the IPv4 addresses of local IPv4-only hosts
      when responding to queries from remote IPv6-only peers.

   o  Support in recursive DNS servers for returning virtual IPv4
      addresses in place of the IPv6 addresses of remote IPv6-only peers
      when responding to queries from local IPv4-only hosts.

   Figure 1 depicts an IPv4-only network that uses Virtual IPv6
   Connectivity.  The network has an IP protocol translator, denoted
   "xlate" in the figure, on its border link to the IPv6 Internet.  The
   network also has sets of virtual IPv6 and IPv4 addresses, which, in
   this example, are taken from the IPv6 address prefix 2001:DB8::/96
   and from the IPv4 address prefix 10.0.0.0/8, respectively.  The
   virtual IPv6 addresses represent the regular IPv4 addresses of the
   IPv4-only network to remote IPv6-only peers.  The virtual IPv4
   addresses represent the regular IPv6 addresses of remote IPv6-only



Vogt & Durand            Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Virtual IPv6 Connectivity           October 2009


   peers to hosts in the IPv4-only network.  Furthermore, the IPv4-only
   network has authoritative and recursive DNS servers that can return,
   respectively, virtual IPv4 addresses in place of local IPv4
   addresses, and virtual IPv4 addresses in place of remote IPv6
   addresses.


                                   virtual IPv6 addresses
      recursive/authoritative           2001:DB8::/96
            DNS servers                       |        (
          ~~~|~~~~~~~|~~~                     |       (
         (  [']     [']  )         ###   ###  |      (
        (                 )          ## ##   /      (
        ( v4-only network ) ======== xlate ======== (  v6 Internet
        (                 )      /   ## ##          (
         (               )      |  ###   ###         (
          ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~       |                     (
                                |                      (
                     virtual IPv4 addresses
                           10.0.0.0/8


        Figure 1: Conceptual overview of Virtual IPv6 Connectivity

   Packets exchanged between an IPv4 host and an IPv6 peer are always
   destined to a virtual IP address, and sourced from a regular IP
   address, when initially dispatched by the sender.  Virtual IP
   addresses route to an IP protocol translator, which performs three
   tasks for each received packet exchanged between an IPv4 host and an
   IPv6 peer:

   o  It maps the IP source and destination addresses in a packet,
      replacing the virtual IP destination address with the represented
      regular IP address, and replacing the regular IP source address
      with the representing virtual IP address.

   o  It uses the Stateless IP/ICMP Translation algorithm [RFC2765] to
      translate the IP header of the packet into an IP header from the
      respective other IP version.  The new IP header uses the IP source
      and destination addresses determined in the foregoing mapping.

   o  It forwards the packet towards the new IP destination address.

   Translated packets are consequently always destined to a regular IP
   address and sourced from a virtual IP address.

   The pair of a virtual IP address and the represented regular IP
   address is called a "mapping".  Mappings are used in IP protocol



Vogt & Durand            Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Virtual IPv6 Connectivity           October 2009


   translators and DNS servers as a basis for translating packets
   between IP versions, and for provisioning virtual IP addresses in the
   DNS.  Mappings between IPv4 addresses and virtual IPv6 addresses are
   static.  Each IPv4 address is mapped to a separate virtual IPv6
   address by appending it to a 96-bit virtual IPv6 address prefix.
   This enables stateless, algorithmic mapping in IP protocol
   translators and authoritative DNS servers.  On the other hand,
   mappings between IPv6 addresses and virtual IPv4 addresses are
   dynamic and on-demand to enable reuse of virtual IPv4 addresses.
   This is inevitable because any set of virtual IPv4 addresses is
   smaller than the global set of regular IPv6 addresses for which
   mappings are potentially needed.  As a consequence, mappings between
   IPv6 addresses and virtual IPv4 addresses must be statefully
   maintained by IP protocol translators and recursive DNS servers per
   communication session.  Mapping creation is triggered by a recursive
   DNS server when receiving a query for an IPv6-only peer's DNS name
   from an IPv4-only host.  The mappings expire when no longer used by a
   communication session.


3.  Virtual IP Addresses

   For the local hosts in an IPv4-only network to communicate with
   remote IPv6 correspondent hosts, local hosts and remote correspondent
   hosts must be able to reach their respective peer with an IP version
   they support: The local hosts must be able to reach the remote
   correspondent hosts via an IPv4 address, and the remote correspondent
   hosts must be able to reach the local hosts via an IPv6 address.
   Virtual IPv6 Connectivity achieves this reachability across IP
   versions by means of virtual IPv4 and IPv6 addresses, which
   respectively map onto the regular IPv6 addresses of remote
   correspondent hosts and the regular IPv4 addresses of local hosts.

   Virtual IPv6 addresses represent local hosts in an IPv4-only network
   to remote IPv6 correspondent hosts.  They are ordinary, global IPv6
   addresses, which the IPv4-only network obtains either from its
   Internet service provider or from an Internet registry.  Virtual IPv6
   addresses are announced externally in the global routing system, but
   are not used internally within the IPv4-only network.  They map one-
   to-one onto the regular IPv4 addresses in the IPv4-only network,
   i.e., there is one unique virtual IPv6 address for each regular IPv4
   address.  There are no restrictions as to how to realize this one-to-
   one mapping.  A simple, recommended way is to reserve a 96-bit IPv6
   address prefix, and to map each regular IPv4 address to the virtual
   IPv6 address that is defined by attaching the 32 bits of the regular
   IPv4 address to the 96 bits of the reserved 96-bit IPv6 address
   prefix.




Vogt & Durand            Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Virtual IPv6 Connectivity           October 2009


   Virtual IPv4 addresses represent remote IPv6 correspondent hosts to
   local hosts in an IPv4-only network.  They are ordinary IPv4
   addresses that map onto the regular IPv6 addresses of the remote
   correspondent hosts.  Virtual IPv4 addresses are announced internally
   in the local routing system of an IPv4-only network, but are not used
   outside the IPv4-only network.  Since virtual IPv4 addresses are used
   only locally within an IPv4-only network, they can be non-global.
   This makes them re-usable in different IPv4-only networks with
   Virtual IPv6 Connectivity.  As an example, virtual IPv4 addresses
   could be taken from the private net-10 or 192.168.0.0/16 address
   spaces [###RFC1918], or from a new IPv4 address block specifically
   allocated for use in IPv4-only networks with Virtual IPv6
   Connectivity.

   Different than mappings between regular IPv4 addresses and virtual
   IPv6 addresses, mappings between regular IPv6 addresses and virtual
   IPv4 addresses cannot be one-to-one because the set of regular IPv6
   addresses that potentially need to be mapped is larger than any pool
   of virtual IPv4 addresses.  Mappings between regular IPv6 addresses
   and virtual IPv4 addresses may instead change dynamically depending
   on the set of remote IPv6 correspondent hosts that communicate with
   an IPv4-only network.  Mappings between regular IPv6 addresses and
   virtual IPv4 addresses are therefore created in an on-demand manner,
   and they have a lifetime after which they may be replaced.

   In the example of Figure 1, the IPv4-only network has obtained the
   96-bit IPv6 address prefix 2001:DB8::/96 for virtual IPv6 addresses,
   so any IPv4 address a.b.c.d from the IPv4-only network can be mapped
   one-to-one to a virtual IPv6 address 2001:DB8::a.b.c.d.  The IPv4-
   only network furthermore uses the private net-10 address space,
   10.0.0.0/8, for virtual IPv4 addresses.  So for any remote IPv6
   correspondent host that communicates with a local host in the IPv4-
   only network, a virtual IPv4 address is allocated from the 8-bit IPv4
   address prefix 10.0.0.0/8, and is temporarily mapped to the remote
   correspondent host's regular IPv6 address.


4.  Discovery of Virtual IP Addresses

   Communications between between an IPv4-only host and an IPv6-only
   peer require that the initiator of a new communication obtains a
   virtual IP address for its peer: An IPv6-only peer intending to reach
   an IPv4-only host must obtain a virtual IPv6 address for the IPv4-
   only host; an IPv4-only host intending to reach an IPv6-only peer
   must obtain a virtual IPv4 address for the IPv6-only peer.  To
   support the discovery of virtual IP addresses, Virtual IPv6
   Connectivity makes virtual IPv4 and IPv6 addresses available via the
   DNS.  This section describes the extensions for recursive and



Vogt & Durand            Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Virtual IPv6 Connectivity           October 2009


   authoritative DNS servers in an IPv4-only network that are necessary
   for this.

4.1.  Discovery of Virtual IPv6 Addresses

   For an IPv6-only peer to obtain via the DNS the virtual IPv6
   addresses of a host in an IPv4-only network, the authoritative DNS
   servers in the IPv4-only network must provide records of type AAAA
   containing the host's virtual IPv6 addresses.  That is, whenever the
   DNS resolves a host's DNS name into an IPv4 address of that host, the
   same DNS name must also resolve to the corresponding virtual IPv6
   address.  The retrieval of virtual IPv6 addresses via DNS then does
   not differ from the retrieval of regular IPv4 addresses.

   Furthermore, the virtual IPv6 addresses maintained by an
   authoritative DNS server for an IPv4-only host should automatically
   adapt when the host's regular IPv4 addresses change in order to
   support dynamic DNS updates: Since the mapping between IPv4 addresses
   and the corresponding virtual IPv6 addresses is static, a change in a
   host's IPv4 address implies that also a virtual IPv6 address of the
   host changes.  The change of the corresponding type-AAAA record
   should be pursued by the authoritative DNS server.  Hosts cannot be
   expected to update records of type AAAA because they are generally
   unaware of their virtual IP addresses.

   To enable accurate provisioning of virtual IPv6 addresses via the
   DNS, Virtual IPv6 Connectivity calls for authoritative DNS servers to
   synthesize type-AAAA records on demand whenever an IPv6 address is
   being requested by a remote peer.  This guarantees that the type-AAAA
   records in a DNS reply contain exactly those virtual IPv6 addresses
   that correspond to the IPv4 addresses of the host whoose DNS name is
   being resolved.


   IPv6 correspondent                         authoritative DNS server
          host                                  in IPv4-only network
           |                                             |
           | DNS query: AAAA for host.v4.net?            |
           |-------------------------------------------> |
           |                                             |
           |             DNS reply: AAAA for host.v4.net |
           |                  with 2001:DB8:ABC::a.b.c.d |
           | <-------------------------------------------|
           |                                             |


         Figure 2: Discovery of virtual IPv6 addresses via the DNS




Vogt & Durand            Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Virtual IPv6 Connectivity           October 2009


   Figure 4 shows the resolution of an IPv4-only host's DNS name into a
   virtual IPv6 address.  In this example, the DNS name is
   "host.v4.net", and it resolves into the regular IPv4 address a.b.c.d.
   The virtual IPv6 address prefix is 2001:DB8:ABC::/96 in this example,
   so the host's IPv4 address maps to the virtual IPv6 address 2001:DB8:
   ABC::a.b.c.d.  The message exchange in the figure begins where a
   remote peer queries an authoritative DNS server in the IPv4-only
   network for a record of type AAAA associated with DNS name
   "host.v4.net".  The authoritative DNS server replies with a type-AAAA
   record containing the virtual IPv6 address 2001:DB8:ABC::a.b.c.d.

4.2.  Discovery of Virtual IPv4 Addresses

   For an IPv4-only host to obtain via the DNS the virtual IPv4
   addresses of a remote IPv6-only peer, the DNS must provide records of
   type A containing the peer's virtual IPv4 addresses.  However,
   different than virtual IPv6 addresses, virtual IPv4 addresses
   generally cannot be provisioned directly by the DNS server that is
   authoritative for the corresponding regular IP addresses.  A DNS
   server handing out virtual IPv4 addresses must have an administrative
   relationship with the IPv4-only network to which the virtual IPv4
   addresses belong.  This relationship generally does not exist for DNS
   servers authoritative for a remote peer's regular IPv6 addresses.

   To enable the retrieval of virtual IPv4 addresses via the DNS despite
   the missing administrative relationship between the authoriative DNS
   server and the IPv4-only network, Virtual IPv6 Connectivity calls for
   recursive DNS servers in IPv4-only networks to serve as proxies for
   the authoritative DNS servers of IPv6-only peers.  Thus, when
   requested by an IPv4-only host to resolve the DNS name of an IPv6-
   only peer, a recursive DNS server retrieves the peer's regular IPv6
   addresses, triggers the creation of a mapping for those regular IPv6
   addresses, and returns the corresponding virtual IPv4 addresses on
   behalf of the peer's authoritative DNS server.

   Since mappings between virtual IPv4 addresses and regular IPv6
   addresses are dynamic, they must be carefully coordinated between IP
   protocol translators and recursive DNS servers if created during DNS
   name resolution.  Lack of coordination can lead to loss of packets
   exchanged between IPv4-only hosts and IPv6-only peers due to
   incorrect translation.  To guarantee the coordination of mappings,
   Virtual IPv6 Connectivity requires all mappings between virtual IPv4
   addresses and regular IPv6 addresses to be created by IP protocol
   translators.  Accordingly, recursive DNS servers must request a
   mapping from an IP protocol translator when needed for a peer's
   regular IPv6 address.  Given such a request, an IP protocol
   translator first checks if a mapping already exists for the peer's
   regular IPv6 address.  If so, the IP protocol translator returns this



Vogt & Durand            Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft          Virtual IPv6 Connectivity           October 2009


   mapping to the recursive DNS server.  If no mapping exists for the
   peer's regular IPv6 address, the IP protocol translator creates a new
   mapping, stores the mapping locally for subsequent translation of
   packets, and returns a copy of the mapping to the requesting
   recursive DNS server.  The recursive DNS server finally generates a
   DNS reply and removes the mapping afterwards.  IP protocol
   translators maintain pools of virtual IPv4 addresses that are
   currently not used in a mapping.  They use virtual IPv4 addresses
   from these pools to create new mappings.

   The reason for requiring IP protocol translators, rather than
   recursive DNS servers, to be in control of mappings is to spare the
   overhead of coordinating mappings that are created based on packets
   received by an IP protocol translator.  These mappings are created
   for the first packet in communication sessions initiated by a remote
   IPv6-only peer.  Having the IP protocol translator create the mapping
   in those cases removes the need to coordinate the mapping with a
   recursive DNS server.  Coordination between the IP protocol
   translator and the recursive DNS server is then only necessary for
   mappings created during DNS name resolution initiated by IPv4-only
   hosts.

   The overall operation of a recursive DNS server in an IPv4-only
   network more specifically proceeds as follows:

   o  Upon receiving a DNS query from a local IPv4-only host for records
      of type A associated with a peer's DNS name, the recursive DNS
      server first attempts to retrieve the records of type A directly
      from the peer's authoritative DNS server.  This is the standard
      operation of a recursive DNS server.

   o  If the recursive DNS server receives a DNS reply with one or more
      records of type A, it returns the DNS reply unchanged to the
      resolving IPv4-only host.  The peer in this case is reachable via
      IPv4, and it is not necessary to allocate a virtual IPv4 address
      for the peer.

   o  If the recursive DNS server fails to receive a DNS reply with a
      record of type A, the peer cannot be reached at a regular IPv4
      address.  The recursive DNS server in this case attempts to
      retrieve records of type AAAA associated with the peers's DNS
      name.

   o  If the recursive DNS server receives a DNS reply with one or more
      records of type AAAA, the peer can be reached via IPv6.  The
      recursive DNS server in this case requests a mapping for each of
      the regular IPv6 addresses in those records from the IP protocol
      translator.  It then synthesizes a DNS reply with a record of type



Vogt & Durand            Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft          Virtual IPv6 Connectivity           October 2009


      A for each virtual IPv4 address in a received mapping, and it
      returns this DNS reply to the resolving IPv4-only host.  The
      recursive DNS server does not store the mappings received from the
      IP protocol translator.

   o  If the recursive DNS server fails to receive a DNS reply with
      records of either type A or type AAAA, it returns an error
      notification to the resolving IPv4-only host.  The peer is in this
      case unreachable from the IPv4-only host.

   As an optimization to reduce latency, a recursive DNS server may send
   DNS queries for type-A and type-AAAA records simultaneously to the
   DNS server authoritative for the peer.  With this optimization, if no
   type-A records can be retrieved, the latency related to retrieving
   type-AAAA records can be reduced or eliminated.

   IP protocol translators remove mappings between virtual IPv4
   addresses and regular IPv6 addresses that appear to be no longer in
   use.  To keep track of which mappings are in use, IP protocol
   translators should maintain an expiration timer for each mapping.
   The expiration timer for a mapping is set at the time the mapping is
   created.  It is reset whenver a mapping for the same regular IPv6
   address is requested, and whenever the mapping is used to translate a
   packet.  After a mapping's expiration timer has reached zero, the
   mapping should be removed, and the virtual IPv4 address from the
   mapping should be returned to the IP protocol translator's pool of
   unallocated virtual IPv4 addresses.
























Vogt & Durand            Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft          Virtual IPv6 Connectivity           October 2009


   IPv4-only host       recursive DNS                     DNS server
       |                 name server                  authoritative for
       |                      |                       correspondent host
       |                      |                               |
       | DNS query:           | DNS query:                    |
       | A for host.v6.net?   | A for host.v6.net?            |
       |--------------------> |-----------------------------> |
       |                      |                               |
       |                      |                    DNS reply: |
       |                      |          no A for host.v6.net |
       |                      | <-----------------------------|
       |                      |                               |
       |                      | DNS query:                    |
       |                      | AAAA for host.v6.net?         |
       |                      |-----------------------------> |
       |                      |                               |
       |                      |                    DNS reply: |
       |                      |          AAAA for host.v6.net |
       |                      |        is 2001:DB8:BCD::X:Y:Z |
       |                      | <-----------------------------|
       |                      |                               |
       |    +----------------------------------+              |
       |    |       create mapping state       |              |
       |    | 2001:DB8:BCD::X:Y:Z <-> 10.u.v.w |              |
       |    +----------------------------------+              |
       |                      |                               |
       |           DNS reply: |                               |
       |    A for host.v6.net |                               |
       |          is 10.u.v.w |                               |
       | <--------------------|                               |
       |                      |                               |


         Figure 3: Discovery of virtual IPv4 addresses via the DNS

   Figure 3 illustrates the operation of a recursive DNS server in an
   IPv4-only network with Virtual IPv6 Connectivity.  The IPv4-only host
   on the left of the figure queries a recursive DNS server in the
   middle for records of type A associated with the DNS name of an IPv6-
   only peer.  The DNS name of the peer is "host.v6.net" in this
   example, and this is associated with a single record of type AAAA for
   IPv6 address 2001:DB8:BCD::X:Y:Z. Since only IPv4 addresses are of
   use for the IPv4-only host, the host naturally does not send a DNS
   query for records of type AAAA.  The recursive DNS server first
   processes the DNS query unchanged, so it tries to retrieve records of
   type A from the DNS server that is authoritative for the peer, as
   represented on the right of Figure 3.  This fails because the peer
   does not have an IPv4 address.  In a second attempt, the recursive



Vogt & Durand            Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft          Virtual IPv6 Connectivity           October 2009


   DNS name server queries for records of type AAAA.  This is
   successful; the recursive DNS server receives a record with IPv6
   address 2001:DB8:BCD::X:Y:Z. The recursive DNS server then obtains
   from an IP protocol translator in the IPv4-only network a mapping
   between the regular IPv6 address 2001:DB8:BCD::X:Y:Z and a virtual
   IPv4 address that routes to this IP protocol translator.  In the
   example of Figure 3, this virtual IPv4 address is 10.u.v.w.  The
   recursive DNS server finally returns a DNS reply to the resolving
   IPv4-only host that contains a record of type A containing the
   virtual IPv4 address 10.u.v.w.


5.  IP Protocol Translation

   In addition to the mapping between regular IP addresses from one IP
   version and virtual IP addresses from the respective other IP
   version, packets exchanged between the local hosts in an IPv4-only
   network and remote IPv6 correspondent hosts must be converted from
   IPv4 to IPv6 and vice versa on the border between the IPv4-only
   network and the IPv6 Internet.  For this purpose, IPv4-only networks
   with Virtual IPv6 Connectivity deploy IP protocol translators on each
   border link that shall be enabled for communications with remote IPv6
   correspondent host.  An IP protocol translator is a router with the
   extra capabilities to map between regular and virtual IP addresses,
   and to convert packets between IPv4 and IPv6 using the appropriate
   mapping.  Figure 1 illustrates an IPv4-only network with one border
   link, which is endowed with an IP protocol translator to achieve
   Virtual IPv6 connectivity for the IPv4-only network.

   Since in general not all packets traversing a border link need to be
   translated between IPv4 and IPv6, IP protocol translators must have a
   means to distinguish packets that require translation from packets
   that can be forwarded without modification.  IP protocol translators
   perform this differentiation based on the packets' IP destination
   address: Packets destined to a regular IP address do not require
   translation, whereas packets destined to a virtual IP address do.
   This rule is independent of whether packets originate within and
   leave the IPv4-only network, or whether the packets originate outside
   and enter the IPv4-only network.  For packets that are destined to a
   regular IP address, an IP protocol translator behaves as an ordinary
   router.  For packets that are destined to a virtual IP address, the
   IP protocol translator performs three tasks:

   o  It maps the IP source and destination addresses in a packet,
      replacing the virtual IP destination address with the represented
      regular IP address, and replacing the regular IP source address
      with the representing virtual IP address.




Vogt & Durand            Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft          Virtual IPv6 Connectivity           October 2009


   o  It uses the Stateless IP/ICMP Translation Algorithm [SIIT] to
      translate the IP header of the packet into an IP header from the
      respective other IP version.  The new IP header uses the IP source
      and destination addresses determined in the foregoing mapping.

   o  It forwards the packet towards the new (regular) IP destination
      address.

   ### DESCRIBE WHEN TRANSLATOR CREATES MAPPING? ###

   To ensure that packets pass through an IP protocol translator if
   exchanged between a host in an IPv4-only network and a remote IPv6
   correspondent host, the routes towards virtual IPv4 and IPv6
   addresses must lead to an IP protocol translator.  Routes to virtual
   IPv4 addresses must be available within the IPv4-only network; they
   lead to the interface of an IP protocol translator that faces the
   IPv4-only network.  Routes to virtual IPv6 addresses must be
   available in the Internet; they lead to the Internet-facing interface
   of an IP protocol translator.  Thus, when a remote IPv6 correspondent
   host sends a packet to the virtual IPv6 address of a local host in
   the IPv4-only network, the packet routes to an IP protocol
   translator, which translates the packet's virtual IPv6 destination
   address into the mapped regular IPv4 destination address, and the
   packet's regular IPv6 source address into a mapped virtual IPv4
   source address.  Vice versa, when the local host in the IPv4-only
   network sends a packet to a remote IPv6 correspondent host, an IP
   protocol translator translates the packet's regular IPv4 source
   address into the mapped virtual IPv6 source address, and the packet's
   virtual IPv4 destination address into the mapped regular IPv6
   destination address.  Both local host and remote correspondent host
   therefore use only their respective IP version; the peer's regular IP
   address from the other IP version is transparent to them.

   There are different means to provision routes to virtual IP
   addresses.  One is through dynamic route announcements by IP protocol
   translators.  IP protocol translators then announce routes towards
   virtual IPv6 addresses on their interfaces towards the IPv6 Internet,
   and routes towards virtual IPv4 addresses on their interfaces towards
   the IPv4-only network.  Static configuration is an alternative for
   part of the routes.  Routes to virtual IPv4 addresses can be
   statically configured in routers of the IPv4-only network.  Routes to
   virtual IPv6 addresses can be statically configured between the IPv4-
   only network and its provider, if the IP protocol translators are
   located on the side of the IP-only network.  In the latter case, it
   is the IPv4-only network's provider that dynamically announces a
   route to virtual IPv6 addresses towards the Internet.

   Routes to virtual IP addresses may be aggregated with routes to other



Vogt & Durand            Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft          Virtual IPv6 Connectivity           October 2009


   IP addresses.  For example, the route to virtual IPv4 addresses
   within an IPv4-only network may be a default route.

   Figure 4 illustrates the the case where routes to virtual IP
   addresses are dynamically announced, using the IPv4-only network from
   Figure 1.


                                 announces route to virtual
                             IPv6 address prefix  2001:DB8::/96
                                              |        (
          ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~                     |       (
         (               )         ###   ###  |      (
        (                 )          ## ##  ----->  (
        ( v4-only network ) ======== xlate ======== (  v6 Internet
        (                 )  <-----  ## ##          (
         (               )      |  ###   ###         (
          ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~       |                     (
                                |                      (
                   announces route to virtual
                 IPv4 address prefix 10.0.0.0/8


           Figure 4: Route announcement for virtual IP addresses

   Since the explicit routes towards virtual IP addresses ensure that
   packets are routed via an IP protocol translator if they require
   translation between IPv4 and IPv6, IPv4-only networks with Virtual
   IPv6 Connectivity may deploy IP protocol translators on only some,
   but not all of their border links.  This can reduce the expenses for
   deployment and operation of Virtual IPv6 Connectivity.

   Since the communication between a host in an IPv4-only network and a
   remote IPv6 correspondent host would break if the mapping between
   either host's regular and virtual IP addresses changed throughout the
   course of the communication, IP protocol translators must ensure that
   mappings are stable for the duration of the communications in which
   they are used.  This is trivial for the mappings between regular IPv4
   addresses and virtual IPv6 addresses because these mappings are one-
   to-one and therefore constant.  However, as one-to-one mappings are
   not possible between the large set of regular IPv6 addresses and the
   necessarily smaller set of virtual IPv4 addresses, IP protocol
   translators need state to ensure that these mappings remain constant
   during the communications in which they are used.  An IP protocol
   translator establishes such state in either of two ways, depending on
   which way a communication is established:





Vogt & Durand            Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft          Virtual IPv6 Connectivity           October 2009


   o  For communications that are initiated by a local host in an IPv4-
      only network, mapping state is created at the time the local host
      retrieves the remote IPv6 correspondent host's virtual IPv4
      address via the DNS.  This ensures that the IP protocol translator
      can map the virtual IPv4 address in the first packet that the
      local host sends to the remote correspondent host.  Mapping state
      creation is in this case initiated by a recursive DNS name server
      from the IPv4-only network.  This will be explained further in
      Section 4.

   o  For communications that are initiated by a remote IPv6
      correspondent host, the creation of mapping state is postponed to
      the time the IP protocol translator receives the first packet that
      the remote correspondent host sends to the local host in the IPv4-
      only network.  It is then the IP protocol translator which
      initiates mapping state creation.  Postponing the creation of
      mapping state is possible in this case because the remote
      correspondent host does not use the virtual IPv4 address for which
      mapping state is created.  The postponement then has the advantage
      that both the creation of mapping state as well as the allocation
      of a virtual IPv4 address happens only when there is actually a
      communication using it.

   The involvement of both IP protocol translators and recursive DNS
   name servers in the creation of mapping state and in the allocation
   of virtual IPv4 addresses calls for coordination between IP protocol
   translators and recursive DNS name servers: IP protocol translators
   must have relevant mapping state even if the creation of the state
   was initiated by a recursive DNS name server; and simultaneous
   allocation of a given virtual IPv4 address by both an IP protocol
   translator and a recursive DNS name server must be avoided.  This
   document assumes that sufficient coordination is in place between IP
   protocol translators and recursive DNS name servers.  IP protocol
   translators and recursive DNS name servers may be co-located to
   simplify their coordination, or they may coordinate by means of a
   protocol specified outside of this document.  It is recommended that
   the maintenance of virtual IPv4 addresses is with the IP protocol
   translator to which they route.  This accelerates packet forwarding
   when the creation of mapping state is inititated by an IP protocol
   translator, and it hence accounts for the commonly stricter delay
   constraints on packet forwarding in routers compared to those on DNS
   lookups.









Vogt & Durand            Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft          Virtual IPv6 Connectivity           October 2009


   IPv4 host         IP  protocol                     IPv6 correspondent
       |              translator                             host
       |                  |                                   |
       |                  |        from 2001:DB8:BCD::X:Y:Z   |
       |                  |          to 2001:DB8:ABC::a.b.c.d |
       |                  | <---------------------------------|
       |                  |                                   |
       |    +----------------------------------+              |
       |    |       create mapping state       |              |
       |    | 2001:DB8:BCD::X:Y:Z <-> 10.u.v.w |              |
       |    +----------------------------------+              |
       |                  |                                   |
       |    from 10.u.v.w |                                   |
       |      to a.b.c.d  |                                   |
       | <----------------|                                   |
       |                  |                                   |
       | from a.b.c.d     | from 2001:DB8:ABC::a.b.c.d        |
       |   to 10.u.v.w    |   to 2001:DB8:BCD::X:Y:Z          |
       |----------------> |---------------------------------> |
       |                  |                                   |
       |    from 10.u.v.w |        from 2001:DB8:BCD::X:Y:Z   |
       |      to a.b.c.d  |          to 2001:DB8:ABC::a.b.c.d |
       | <----------------| <---------------------------------|
       |                  |                                   |


       Figure 5: Mapping state creation and packet translation for a
           communication initiated by an IPv6 correspondent host

   Figure 5 illustrates the mapping state creation and the translation
   of packets between IPv4 and IPv6 for a communication that is
   initiated by a remote IPv6 correspondent host.  The packets are
   exchanged between a local host in an IPv4-only network on the left,
   and the remote IPv6 correspondent host on the right.  The IPv4-only
   network uses Virtual IPv6 Connectivity, so the packets traverse an IP
   protocol translator.  Continuing from previous examples, virtual IPv6
   addresses are taken from the IPv6 address prefix 2001::DB8:ABC::/96,
   and virtual IPv4 addresses are taken from the private net-10 address
   space, 10.0.0.0/8.  The local host's regular IPv4 address, a.b.c.d,
   maps to the virtual IPv6 address 2001:DB8:ABC::a.b.c.d.  This mapping
   is constant.  The remote correspondent host's regular IPv6 address,
   2001:DB8:BCD::X:Y:Z, maps to the virtual IPv4 address 10.u.v.w.  This
   mapping is temporary and created in on-demand manner.  The dynamic
   state for the mapping between the regular IPv6 address 2001:DB8:BCD::
   X:Y:Z and the virtual IPv4 address 10.u.v.w is created when the first
   packet in the communication reaches the IP protocol translator.  Once
   the state is created, subsequent packets from the same communication
   can be translated from IPv6 to IPv4 and vice versa, as shown in the



Vogt & Durand            Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft          Virtual IPv6 Connectivity           October 2009


   figure.


6.  Multi-Homing Support

   A technique for networks to increase the performance and reliability
   of their Internet connectivity is to establish multiple border links
   to either the same or different providers.  This technique is called
   "multi-homing".  To combine multi-homing with Virtual IPv6
   Connectivity, an IPv4-only network must ensure that packets exchanged
   between local IPv4 hosts and remote IPv6 correspondent hosts pass
   through an IP protocol translator that is aware of the mappings for
   the virtual IP addresses used in the packets.  This can be achieved
   in one of the following two ways:

   o  Shared virtual IP addresses -- A route to a virtual IPv4 or IPv6
      address originates at all IP protocol translators, and all IP
      protocol translators can handle the mapping for all virtual IP
      addresses.  This requires synchronization of mapping state across
      IP protocol translators.

   o  Unshared virtual IP addresses -- A route to each virtual IPv4 or
      IPv6 address originates at exactly one IP protocol translator, and
      only that IP protocol translator can handle the mapping for the
      virtual IP address.  It is then sufficient to maintain mapping
      state for a given virtual IPv4 address in only one IP protocol
      translator.

   Sharing virtual IP addresses across multiple IP protocol translators
   provides a basis for automated fail-over and dynamic load balancing
   between border links.  Fail-over from a failing IP protocol
   translator to a backup happens automatically due to the redundancy of
   routes for a given virtual IP address.  Dynamic load balancing can be
   achieved if the routes to virtual IP addresses are dynamically
   announced.  Virtual IP addresses can then be dynamically divided
   across available IP protocol translators.  On the other hand, shared
   virtual IP addresses require IP protocol translators to map the
   complete set of virtual IP addresses in a consistent manner.  This
   implies two costs: First, it involves more mapping state for each IP
   protocol translator, since mappings must be stored even when unused.
   Second, it necessitates synchronization between IP protocol
   translators to ensure mapping consistency.  Whereas the mapping
   consistency for virtual IPv6 addresses can be guaranteed by pre-
   configuration due to the staticness of these mappings, mappings for
   virtual IPv4 addresses are dynamic and must hence be synchronized
   across IP protocol translators.

   Synchronization of mapping state for virtual IPv4 addresses may be



Vogt & Durand            Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft          Virtual IPv6 Connectivity           October 2009


   proactive or on-demand.  Proactive synchronization ensures that IP
   protocol translators have a consistent view of all mappings at any
   time.  This requires immediate mapping updates whenever a new mapping
   is created.  On-demand synchronization enables IP protocol
   translators to retrieve any missing mapping they may need to process
   a packet.  The mappings of virtual IPv4 addresses may then be
   centrally maintained in a single database that IP protocol
   translators can query when needed.

   Unshared virtual IP addresses can be used without synchronization
   between IP protocol translators.  It is instead sufficient to ensure
   that the virtual IPv4 and IPv6 addresses that are used in the
   mappings for a particular communication belong to partitions from the
   same IP protocol translator.  The disjoint route announcements of the
   IP protocol translators then ensure that packets exchanged between
   IPv4 and IPv6 hosts always route to the IP protocol translator that
   can map the IP addresses in the packets.  A disadvantage of
   partitioned virtual IP addresses is that active communications cannot
   be switched to a different IP protocol translator for the purpose of
   fail-over or load balancing because they are bound to a route via a
   particular IP protocol translator.

   Although active communications cannot be switched between IP protocol
   translators, communications that are newly established should be able
   to go via any IP protocol translator of an IPv4-only network.  The
   partitioning of virtual IPv4 addresses does not prevent this: Since
   the mappings for virtual IPv4 addresses are dynamically created, they
   can be created with a virtual IPv4 address that routes to a preferred
   IP protocol translator.  However, the mappings for virtual IPv6
   addresses cannot reflect a current preference for a specific IP
   protocol translator because those mappings are constant.  So to
   enable the establishment of a new communication via any IP protocol
   translator, each regular IPv4 address of a host within the IPv4-only
   network must be mapped to multiple virtual IPv6 addresses, one for
   each IP protocol translator.

   The decision of whether to use shared vs. partitioned virtual IP
   addresses may have an impact on whether a multi-homed IPv4 network
   can use virtual IPv6 addresses that have been allocated to its
   provider: If the border links of the multi-homed IPv4 network connect
   to different providers, virtual IPv6 addresses must be provider-
   independent in order to be shared across IP protocol translators.
   This may cause additional load for the global routing system because
   routes towards the virtual IPv6 addresses could not be announced in
   aggregated manner.  It is therefore recommended that multi-homed IPv4
   networks with border links to multiple providers use virtual IPv6
   addresses that are provider-allocated, and hence by necessity
   partitioned virtual IP addresses.



Vogt & Durand            Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft          Virtual IPv6 Connectivity           October 2009


7.  Side-Effects

   The translation of IP addresses in the network without explicit
   coordination with applications and host stacks inevitably leads to
   side-effects.  The following explains the side-effects of Virtual
   IPv6 Connectivity, and shows why those are unavoidable given the
   objectives for which Virtual IPv6 Connectivity was designed.

   The side-effects of Virtual IPv6 Connectivity are three-fold:

   o  It may interfere with applications that expect addresses not to
      change in packets en route.

   o  It may cause the establishment of new communication sessions to
      fail due to the unavailability or staleness of a virtual IPv4
      address.

   o  It requires the use of a recursive DNS server for name resolution
      by IPv4-only hosts.

   Interferences may affect applications that use address referrals
   inside packet payloads.  Since the translation between IPv4 and IPv6
   addresses affects only the IP headers in packets, but no address
   referrals inside packet payloads, addresses referenced in packet
   payloads may become unreachable when a packet traverses an address
   translator.  Special support, either in the applications themselves
   or in the address translator, can mitigate the problem.  But such
   special support cannot be guaranteed for every application.

   Unavailability of virtual IPv4 addresses may cause the establishment
   of new communication sessions to fail if a large number of IPv6-only
   hosts communicate with an IPv4-only network.  In such a case, the
   pool of virtual IPv4 addresses may temporarily be exhausted.
   Staleness of virtual IPv4 addresses can cause session establishment
   failures if an application uses a virtual IPv4 address a long time
   after it was mapped to the corresponding regular IPv6 address.  The
   virtual IPv4 address may at that point have been mapped to a
   different regular IPv6 address, as mappings between regular IPv6
   addresses and virtual IPv4 addresses are dynamic.

   The need for recursive DNS servers in IPv4-only networks precludes
   direct resolution of DNS names by hosts, and requires configuration
   of hosts in IPv4-only networks with a recursive DNS server.  While
   this requirement is often negligible due to the widespread use of
   recursive DNS servers, preventing direct DNS name resolution
   altogether is typically difficult.

   All of these side-effects are unavoidable, since they are a



Vogt & Durand            Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft          Virtual IPv6 Connectivity           October 2009


   consequence of the objectives for which Virtual IPv6 Connectivity was
   designed, that is, to enable bilateral communications between IPv4-
   only hosts and IPv6-only peers with upgrades only to IPv4-only
   networks:

   o  The objective to upgrade only IPv4-only networks requires that
      addresses are translated, in the network, without explicit
      coordination with host stacks and applications.  This may cause
      interference with applications that expect addresses not to change
      in packets en route.

   o  The objective to enable bilateral communications between IPv4-only
      hosts and IPv6-only peers requires that IPv6-only peers must be
      represented to IPv4-only hosts via virtual IPv4 addresses.  The
      mappings between regular IPv6 addresses and virtual IPv4 addresses
      must be dynamic, since no set of IPv4 addresses can be large
      enough to provide for static virtual IPv4 addresses for all
      potential IPv6-only peers.  This may cause the establishment of
      new communication sessions to fail due to the unavailability or
      staleness of a virtual IPv4 address.

   o  The need to translate addresses without explicit coordination with
      host stacks and applications calls for the use of recursive DNS
      servers by IPv4-only hosts, in order to handle the translation of
      DNS messages from regular IPv6 addresses to virtual IPv4
      addresses.  Even though it would be possible to translate DNS
      messages without recursive DNS server, doing so would defeat the
      use of DNS security extensions.


8.  Security Considerations

   No security considerations yet; to be written down.


9.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.


10.  Acknowledgment

   Many ideas in Virtual IPv6 Connectivity were originally proposed in
   2002 by Alain Durand [draft-durand-ngtrans-nat64-nat46].

   The authors would like to thank Edward Jankiewicz, Dave Thaler, and
   Brian Carpenter for their reviews of this document and their valuable
   comments.



Vogt & Durand            Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft          Virtual IPv6 Connectivity           October 2009


   This document was generated using the xml2rfc tool.


11.  References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2765]  Nordmark, E., "Stateless IP/ICMP Translation Algorithm
              (SIIT)", RFC 2765, February 2000.


Appendix A.  Pending Document Changes

   This section identifies pending document changes, proposed by a
   reviewer or author, that have not been addressed so far.

   o  Describe the extent to which Virtual IPv6 Connectivity supports
      DNSSEC, and explain how DNSSEC can be put to use.  (Comment from
      Brian Carpenter.)

   o  Describe how reverse DNS lookups function for virtual IP
      addresses.  (Comment from Brian Carpenter.)

   o  Integrate support for IPv4/IPv4 address translation for
      communication sessions with IPv4 peers?  (Comment from Edward
      Jankiewicz.  Needs working group feedback.)


Appendix B.  Log of Document Changes

   The following is a list of technical changes that were made from
   version 00 to version 01 of the document.  Editorial revisions are
   not explicitly mentioned.  Part of the technical and editorial
   document changes address review comments received from Dave Thaler.

   o  Revised abstract and introduction to emphasize that the impetus to
      invest in IPv4/IPv6 interworking will shift towards the legacy
      IPv4 Internet as IPv6 becomes more deployed.

   o  Clarified that virtual IP address prefixes used in figures and
      examples throughout the document are not mandatory.  Which
      prefixes are used is up to the network operator/administrator
      deploying Virtual IPv6 Connectivity.

   o  Clarified in which situations an a-priori DNS name resolution is
      needed to initiate a new communication session.




Vogt & Durand            Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft          Virtual IPv6 Connectivity           October 2009


   o  Elaborated on how routes towards virtual IP addresses can be
      established.  Besides announcement of these routes by IP address
      translators, the document now also mentiones static configuration,
      and aggregation of the routes within a default route.

   o  Highlighted the importance of coordination between IP protocol
      translators and recursive DNS servers.  Still need to specify such
      coordination in more detail.

   o  Explained how dynamic DNS updates work.  This required a
      clarification of how authoritative DNS servers generate type-AAAA
      records for virtual IPv6 addresses.

   o  Elaborated on the pros and cons of the two multi-homing techniques
      described in section 6, "Multi-Homing".  Section 6 still requires
      more work.

   The following is a list of technical changes that were made from
   version 01 to version 02 of the document.  Editorial revisions are
   not explicitly mentioned.  Part of the technical and editorial
   document changes address review comments received from Edward
   Jankiewicz.

   o  Revised the conceptual overview.

   o  Swapped the order of sections 4 and 5, "IP Protocol Translation"
      and "Discovery of Virtual IP Addresses", respectively.  The reason
      for originally having the former section first was that it
      included information about address mappings that was useful for
      the latter section.  However, the comment that the new order is
      easier to follow for the reader is a good one.

   o  Revised sections 4 and 5, "IP Protocol Translation" and "Discovery
      of Virtual IP Addresses", to accommodate the change of order of
      these sections (see previous bullet).

   o  Clarified that address mappings are maintained by IP protocol
      translators, not by recursive DNS servers.  Recursive DNS servers
      may only trigger the creation of a new address mapping during DNS
      name resolution.  Elaborated further on the coordination between
      IP protocol translators and recursive DNS servers.

   o  Included a note that the attempts to retrieve regular IPv4 and
      IPv6 addresses by a recursive DNS server could be initiated
      simultaneously to reduce latency.

   o  Elaborated on the mapping management for the case when two IPv4-
      only hosts want to communicate with the same remote IPv6-only



Vogt & Durand            Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft          Virtual IPv6 Connectivity           October 2009


      peer.  In this case, the same mapping should be used for both
      communication sessions to reduce the number of virtual IPv4
      addresses needed.

   o  Further review comments on abstract and introduction were already
      addressed by the document revision from version 00 to version 01.


Authors' Addresses

   Christian Vogt
   Ericsson Research, NomadicLab
   Hirsalantie 11
   02420 Jorvas
   Finland

   Email: christian.vogt@ericsson.com


   Alain Durand
   Comcast
   1500 Market Street
   Philadelphia, PA  19102
   USA

   Email: alain_durand@cable.comcast.com

























Vogt & Durand            Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 24]

