A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3588

        Title:      Diameter Base Protocol
        Author(s):  P. Calhoun, J. Loughney, E. Guttman, G. Zorn,
                    J. Arkko
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       September 2003
        Mailbox:    pcalhoun@airespace.com, john.Loughney@nokia.com,
                    Jari.Arkko@ericsson.com, erik.guttman@sun.com
        Pages:      147
        Characters: 341261
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-aaa-diameter-17.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3588.txt


The Diameter base protocol is intended to provide an Authentication,
Authorization and Accounting (AAA) framework for applications such as
network access or IP mobility.  Diameter is also intended to work in
both local Authentication, Authorization & Accounting and roaming
situations.  This document specifies the message format, transport,
error reporting, accounting and security services to be used by all
Diameter applications.  The Diameter base application needs to be
supported by all Diameter implementations.

This document is a product of the Authentication, Authorization and
Accounting Working Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Working Group.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
