


Network Working Group                                          V. Fuller
Internet-Draft                                              D. Farinacci
Intended status: Experimental                              cisco Systems
Expires: April 21, 2011                                 October 18, 2010


                            LISP Map Server
                       draft-ietf-lisp-ms-06.txt

Abstract

   This draft describes the LISP Map-Server (LISP-MS), a computing
   system which provides a simple LISP protocol interface as a "front
   end" to the Endpoint-ID (EID) to Routing Locator (RLOC) mapping
   database and associated virtual network of LISP protocol elements.

   The purpose of the Map-Server is to simplify the implementation and
   operation of LISP Ingress Tunnel Routers (ITRs) and Egress Tunnel
   Routers (ETRs), the devices that implement the "edge" of the LISP
   infrastructure and which connect directly to LISP-capable Internet
   end sites.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 21, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents



Fuller & Farinacci       Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               LISP Map Server                October 2010


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Definition of Terms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Basic Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Interactions With Other LISP Components  . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.1.  ITR EID-to-RLOC Mapping Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.2.  ETR/Map-Server EID Prefix Registration . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.3.  Map-Server Processing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.4.  Map-Resolver Processing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       4.4.1.  Anycast Map-Resolver Operation . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  Open Issues and Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14


























Fuller & Farinacci       Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               LISP Map Server                October 2010


1.  Introduction

   LISP [LISP] specifies an architecture and mechanism for replacing the
   addresses currently used by IP with two separate name spaces: EIDs,
   used within sites, and RLOCs, used on the transit networks that make
   up the Internet infrastructure.  To achieve this separation, LISP
   defines protocol mechanisms for mapping from EIDs to RLOCs.  In
   addition, LISP assumes the existence of a database to store and
   propagate those mappings globally.  Several such databases have been
   proposed, among them: LISP-CONS [CONS], LISP-NERD, [NERD] and LISP+
   ALT [ALT].

   There are two types of operation for a LISP Map-Server: as a Map-
   Resolver, which accepts Map-Requests from an ITR and "resolves" the
   EID-to-RLOC mapping using the distributed mapping database, and as a
   Map-Server, which learns authoritative EID-to-RLOC mappings from an
   ETR and publish them in the database.  A single device may implement
   one or both types of operation.

   Conceptually, LISP Map-Servers share some of the same basic
   configuration and maintenance properties as Domain Name System (DNS)
   [RFC1035] servers and caching resolvers.  With this in mind, this
   specification borrows familiar terminology (resolver and server) from
   the DNS specifications.

   Note that while this document assumes a LISP+ALT database mapping
   infrastructure to illustrate certain aspects of Map-Server and Map-
   Resolver operation, this is not intended to preclude the use of Map-
   Servers and Map-Resolvers as a standardized interface for ITRs and
   ETRs to access other mapping database systems.





















Fuller & Farinacci       Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               LISP Map Server                October 2010


2.  Definition of Terms

   Map-Server:   a network infrastructure component which learns EID-to-
      RLOC mapping entries from an authoritative source (typically, an
      ETR, through static configuration or another out-of-band mechanism
      may be used).  A Map-Server publishes these mappings in the
      distributed mapping database.

   Map-Resolver:   a network infrastructure component which accepts LISP
      Encapsulated Map-Requests, typically from an ITR, quickly
      determines whether or not the destination IP address is part of
      the EID namespace; if it is not, a Negative Map-Reply is
      immediately returned.  Otherwise, the Map-Resolver finds the
      appropriate EID-to-RLOC mapping by consulting the distributed
      mapping database system.

   Encapsulated Map-Request:   a LISP Map-Request with an additional
      LISP header prepended.  Sent to UDP destination port 4342.  The
      "outer" addresses are globally-routeable IP addresses, also known
      as RLOCs.  Used by an ITR when sending to a Map-Resolver and by a
      Map-Server when forwarding a Map-Request to an ETR.

   Negative Map-Reply:   a LISP Map-Reply that contains an empty
      locator-set.  Returned in response to a Map-Request if the
      destination EID does not exist in the mapping database.
      Typically, this means that the "EID" being requested is an IP
      address connected to a non-LISP site.

   Map-Register message:   a LISP message sent by an ETR to a Map-Server
      to register its associated EID-prefixes.  In addition to the set
      of EID-prefixes to register, the message includes one or more
      RLOCs to be be used by the Map-Server when forwarding Map-Requests
      (re-formatted as Encapsulated Map-Requests) received through the
      database mapping system.

   For definitions of other terms, notably Map-Request, Map-Reply,
   Ingress Tunnel Router (ITR), and Egress Tunnel Router (ETR), please
   consult the LISP specification [LISP].













Fuller & Farinacci       Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               LISP Map Server                October 2010


3.  Basic Overview

   A Map-Server is a device which publishes EID-prefix information on
   behalf of ETRs and connects to the LISP distributed mapping database
   system to help answer LISP Map-Requests seeking the RLOCs for those
   EID-prefixes.  To publish its EID-prefixes, an ETR periodically sends
   Map-Register messages to the Map-Server.  A Map-Register message
   contains a list of EID-prefixes plus a set of RLOCs that can be used
   to reach the ETR when a Map-Server needs to forward a Map-Request to
   it.

   When LISP+ALT is used as the mapping database, a Map-Server connects
   to ALT network and acts as a "last-hop" ALT router.  Intermediate ALT
   routers forward Map-Requests to the Map-Server that advertises a
   particular EID-prefix and the Map-Server forwards them to the owning
   ETR, which responds with Map-Reply messages.

   The LISP Map-Server design also includes the operation of a Map-
   Resolver, which receives Encapsulated Map-Requests from its client
   ITRs and uses the distributed mapping database system to find the
   appropriate ETR to answer those requests.  On a LISP+ALT network, a
   Map-Resolver acts as a "first-hop" ALT router.  It has GRE tunnels
   configured to other ALT routers and uses BGP to learn paths to ETRs
   for different prefixes in the LISP+ALT database.  The Map-Resolver
   uses this path information to forward Map-Requests over the ALT to
   the correct ETRs.  A Map-Resolver may operate in a non-caching mode,
   where it simply de-capsulates and forwards the Encapsulated Map-
   Requests that it receives from ITRs.

   Alternatively, a Map-Resolver may operate in a caching mode, where it
   saves information about outsanding Map-Reqeusts, originates new Map-
   Requests to the correct ETR(s), accepts and caches the Map-Replies,
   and finally forwards the Map-Replies to the original ITRs.  One
   significant issue with use of caching in a Map-Resolver is that it
   hides the original ITR source of a Map-Request, which prevents an ETR
   from tailoring its responses to that source; this reduces the inbound
   traffic- engineering capability for the site owning the ETR.  In
   addition, caching in a Map-Resolver exacerbates problems associated
   with old mappings being cached; an outdated, cached mapping in an ITR
   affects only that ITR and traffic originated by its site while an
   outdate, cached mapping in a Map-Resolver could cause a problem with
   a wider scope.  More experience with caching Map-Resolvers on the
   LISP pilot network will be needed to determine whether their use can
   be recommended.

   While a single device can implement the functions of both a Map-
   Server and a Map-Resolver.  As is the case with the DNS, however,
   operational simplicity argues for keeping those functions separate.



Fuller & Farinacci       Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               LISP Map Server                October 2010


4.  Interactions With Other LISP Components

4.1.  ITR EID-to-RLOC Mapping Resolution

   An ITR is configured with the address of a Map-Resolver.  This
   address is a "locator" or RLOC in that it must be routeable on the
   underlying core network; it must not need to be resolved through LISP
   EID-to-RLOC mapping as that would introduce a circular dependency.
   When using a Map-Resolver, an ITR does not need to connect to any
   other database mapping system.  In particular, the ITR need not
   connect to the LISP+ALT infrastructure or implement the BGP and GRE
   protocols that it uses.

   An ITR sends an Encapsulated Map-Request to a configured Map-Resolver
   when it needs an EID-to-RLOC mapping that is not found in its local
   map-cache.  Using the Map-Resolver greatly reduces both the
   complexity of the ITR implementation the costs associated with its
   operation.

   In response to an Encapsulated Map-Request, the ITR can expect one of
   the following:

   o  A negative LISP Map-Reply if the Map-Resolver can determine that
      the requested EID does not exist.  The ITR saves EID-prefix
      returned in the Map-Reply in its cache, marking it as non-LISP-
      capable and knows not to attempt LISP encapsulation for
      destinations matching it.

   o  A LISP Map-Reply from the ETR that owns the EID-to-RLOC mapping or
      possibly from a Map-Server answering on behalf of the ETR.  Note
      that the stateless nature of non-caching Map-Resolver forwarding
      means that the Map-Reply may not be from the Map-Resolver to which
      the Encapsulated Map-Request was sent unless the target Map-
      Resolver offers caching (Section 4.4).

   Note that an ITR may use a Map-Resolver while also participating in
   another mapping database mechanism.  For example, an ITR that runs
   LISP+ALT can also send Encapsulated Map-Requests to a Map-Resolver.
   When doing this, an ITR should prefer querying an ETR learned through
   the ALT network as LISP+ALT provides better information about the set
   of defined EID-prefixes.  Such a configuration is expected to be very
   rare, since there is little benefit to using a Map-Resolver if an ITR
   is already using a mapping database system.  There would be, for
   example, no need for such an ITR to send a Map-Request to a possibly
   non-existent EID (and rely on Negative Map-Replies) if it can consult
   the ALT database to verify that an EID-prefix is present before
   sending that Map-Request.




Fuller & Farinacci       Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               LISP Map Server                October 2010


4.2.  ETR/Map-Server EID Prefix Registration

   An ETR publishes its EID-prefixes on a Map-Server by sending LISP
   Map-Register messages.  A Map-Register message includes
   authentication data, so prior to sending a Map-Register message, the
   ETR and Map-Server must be configured with a secret shared-key.  A
   Map-Server's configuration should also include list of the EID-
   prefixes for which each ETR is authoratative and should verify that a
   Map-Register received from an ETR only contain EID-prefixes that are
   associated with that ETR.  While this check is not mandatory, it is
   strongly encouraged as a failure to so leaves the mapping system
   vulnerable to simple EID-prefix hijacking attacks.  As developers and
   users gain experience with the mapping system, additional, stronger
   security measures may be added to the registration process.

   Map-Register messages are sent periodically from an ETR to a Map-
   Server with a suggested interval between messages of one minute.  A
   Map-Server should time-out and remove an ETR's registration if it has
   not received a valid Map-Register message within the past three
   minutes.  When first contacting a Map-Server after restart or changes
   to its EID-to-RLOC database mappings, an ETR may initially send Map-
   Register messages at an increased frequency, up to one every 20
   seconds.  This "quick registration" period is limited to five minutes
   in duration.

   Note that a one-minute minimum registration interval during steady
   state maintenance of an association between an ITR and a Map-Server
   does set a lower-bound on how quickly and how frequently a mapping
   database entry can be updated.  This may have implications for what
   sorts of mobility can supported directly by the mapping system.  For
   a discussion on one way that faster mobility may be implemented for
   individual devices, please see [LISP-MN].

   An ETR which uses a Map-Server to publish its EID-to-RLOC mappings
   does not need to participate further in the mapping database
   protocol(s).  When using a LISP+ALT mapping database, for example,
   this means that the ETR does not need to implement GRE or BGP, which
   greatly simplifies its configuration and reduces its cost of
   operation.

   Note that use of a Map-Server does not preclude an ETR from also
   connecting to the mapping database (i.e. it could also connect to the
   LISP+ALT network) but doing so doesn't seem particularly useful as
   the whole purpose of using a Map-Server is to avoid the complexity of
   the mapping database protocols.






Fuller & Farinacci       Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               LISP Map Server                October 2010


4.3.  Map-Server Processing

   The operation of a Map-Server, once it has EID-prefixes registered by
   its client ETRs, is quite simple.  In response to a Map-Request
   (received over the ALT if LISP+ALT is in use), the Map-Server
   verifies that the destination EID matches an EID-prefix for which it
   has one or more registered ETRs, then re-encapsulates and forwards
   the now-Encapsulated Map-Request to a matching ETR.  It does not
   otherwise alter the Map-Request so any Map-Reply sent by the ETR is
   returned to the RLOC in the Map-Request, not to the Map-Server.
   Unless also acting as a Map-Resolver, a Map-Server should never
   receive Map-Replies; any such messages should be discarded without
   response, perhaps accompanied by logging of a diagnostic message if
   the rate of Map-Replies is suggestive of malicious traffic.

4.4.  Map-Resolver Processing

   In response to an Encapsulated Map-Request, a Map-Resolver de-
   capsulates the message then checks its local database of mapping
   entries (statically configured, cached, or learned from associated
   ETRs).  If it finds a matching entry, it returns a non-authoritative
   LISP Map-Reply with the known mapping.

   If the Map-Resolver does not have the mapping entry and if it can
   determine that the requested IP address does not match an EID-prefix
   in the mapping database, it immediately returns a negative LISP Map-
   Reply, one which contains an EID-prefix and an empty locator-set.  To
   minimize the number of negative cache entries needed by an ITR, the
   Map-Resolver should return the least-specific prefix which both
   matches the original query and does not match any EID-prefix known to
   exist in the LISP-capable infrastructure.

   If the Map-Resolver does not have sufficient information to know
   whether the EID exists, it needs to forward the Map-Request to
   another device which has more information about the EID being
   requested.  This is done in one of two ways:

   1.  A non-caching Map-Resolver simply forwards the unencapsulated
       Map-Request, with the original ITR RLOC as the source, on to the
       distributed mapping database.  Using a LISP+ALT mapaping
       database, the Map-Resolver is connected to the ALT network and
       sends the Map-Request to the next ALT hop learned from its ALT
       BGP neighbors.  The Map-Resolver does not send any response to
       the ITR; since the source RLOC is that of the ITR, the ETR or
       Map-Server which receives the Map-Request over the ALT and
       responds will do so directly to the ITR.





Fuller & Farinacci       Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               LISP Map Server                October 2010


   2.  A caching Map-Resolver queues information from the Encapsulated
       Map-Request, including the ITR RLOC and the original nonce.  It
       then modifies the Map-Request to use its own RLOC, generates a
       "local nonce" (which is also saved in the request queue entry),
       and forwards the Map-Request as above.  When the Map-Resolver
       receives a Map-Reply, it looks in its request queue to match the
       reply nonce to a "local nonce" entry then de-queues the entry and
       uses the saved original nonce and ITR RLOC to re-write those
       fields in the Map-Reply before sending to the ITR.  The request
       queue entry is also deleted and the mapping entries from the Map-
       Reply are saved in the Map-Resolver's cache.

4.4.1.  Anycast Map-Resolver Operation

   A Map-Resolver can be set up to use "anycast", where where the same
   address is assigned to multiple Map-Resolvers and is propagated
   through IGP routing, to facilitate the use of a topologically-close
   Map-Resolver each ITR.

   Note that Map-Server associations with ETRs should not use anycast
   addresses as registrations need to be established between an ETR and
   a specific set of Map-Servers, each identified by a specific
   registation association.




























Fuller & Farinacci       Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               LISP Map Server                October 2010


5.  Open Issues and Considerations

   There are a number of issues with the Map-Server and Map-Resolver
   design that are not yet completely understood.  Among these are:

   o  Feasibility, performance, and complexity trade-offs of
      implementing caching in Map-Resolvers

   o  Convergence time when an EID-to-RLOC mapping changes and
      mechanisms for detecting and refreshing or removing stale, cached
      information

   o  Deployability and complexity trade-offs of implementing stronger
      security measures in both EID-prefix registration and Map-Request/
      Map-Reply processing

   o  Requirements for additional state in the registration process
      between Map-Servers and ETRs

   o  Possible need for security associations between a Map-Resolver and
      its client ITRs

   The authors expect that experimentation on the LISP pilot network
   will help answer open questions surrounding these and other issues.



























Fuller & Farinacci       Expires April 21, 2011                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               LISP Map Server                October 2010


6.  Security Considerations

   The 2-way nonce exchange documented in [LISP] can be used to avoid
   ITR spoofing attacks.

   To publish an authoritative EID-to-RLOC mapping with a Map-Server, an
   ETR includes authentication data that is a hash of the message using
   pair-wise shared key.  An implementation must support use of HMAC-
   SHA-1-96 [RFC2404] and should support use of HMAC-SHA-128-256
   [RFC4634].  Key changes are initially expected to be manual though a
   key-chaining scheme may be developed as a future extension of this
   specification.

   As noted in Section 4.2, a Map-Server should verify that all EID-
   prefixes registered by an ETR match configuration stored on the Map-
   Server.

   The current LISP and LISP-MS protocol exchange, where an ITR sends a
   Map-Request through a Map-Resolver, mapping database infrastructure,
   and Map-Server while an ETR returns a Map-Reply directly to the ITR
   makes it difficult for the ITR to verify that the returned EID-prefix
   length matches that registered by the ETR with, and therefore checked
   by, a Map-Server.

   While beyond the scope of securing an individual Map-Server or Map-
   Resolver, it should be noted that a BGP-based LISP+ALT network (if
   ALT is used as the mapping database infrastructure) can take
   advantage of technology being developed by the IETF SIDR working
   group or either S-BGP [I-D.murphy-bgp-secr] or soBGP
   [I-D.white-sobgparchitecture] should they be developed and widely
   deployed.




















Fuller & Farinacci       Expires April 21, 2011                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               LISP Map Server                October 2010


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [ALT]      Farinacci, D., Fuller, V., Meyer, D., and D. Lewis, "LISP
              Alternative Topology (LISP-ALT)",
              draft-ietf-lisp-alt-05.txt (work in progress),
              October 2010.

   [LISP]     Farinacci, D., Fuller, V., Meyer, D., and D. Lewis,
              "Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP)",
              draft-ietf-lisp-09.txt (work in progress), October 2010.

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
              specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [RFC2404]  Madson, C. and R. Glenn, "The Use of HMAC-SHA-1-96 within
              ESP and AH", RFC 2404, November 1998.

   [RFC4634]  Eastlake, D. and T. Hansen, "US Secure Hash Algorithms
              (SHA and HMAC-SHA)", RFC 4634, July 2006.

7.2.  Informative References

   [CONS]     Farinacci, D., Fuller, V., and D. Meyer, "LISP-CONS: A
              Content distribution Overlay Network Service for LISP",
              draft-meyer-lisp-cons-03.txt (work in progress),
              November 2007.

   [I-D.murphy-bgp-secr]
              Murphy, S., "BGP Security Analysis",
              draft-murphy-bgp-secr-04 (work in progress),
              November 2001.

   [I-D.white-sobgparchitecture]
              White, R., "Architecture and Deployment Considerations for
              Secure Origin BGP (soBGP)",
              draft-white-sobgparchitecture-00 (work in progress),
              May 2004.

   [LISP-MN]  Farinacci, D., Fuller, V., Meyer, D., and D. Lewis, "LISP
              Mobile Node Architecture", draft-meyer-lisp-mn-03.txt
              (work in progress), August 2010.

   [NERD]     Lear, E., "NERD: A Not-so-novel EID to RLOC Database",
              draft-lear-lisp-nerd-08.txt (work in progress),
              March 2010.




Fuller & Farinacci       Expires April 21, 2011                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft               LISP Map Server                October 2010


Appendix A.  Acknowledgments

   The authors would like to thank Greg Schudel, Darrel Lewis, John
   Zwiebel, Andrew Partan, Dave Meyer, Isidor Kouvelas, Jesper Skriver,
   and members of the lisp@ietf.org mailing list for their feedback and
   helpful suggestions.

   Special thanks are due to Noel Chiappa for his extensive work on
   caching with LISP-CONS, some of which will be used by Map-Resolvers.










































Fuller & Farinacci       Expires April 21, 2011                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft               LISP Map Server                October 2010


Authors' Addresses

   Vince Fuller
   cisco Systems
   Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Email: vaf@cisco.com


   Dino   Farinacci
   cisco Systems
   Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Email: dino@cisco.com

































Fuller & Farinacci       Expires April 21, 2011                [Page 14]


