Internet Engineering Task Force                           G. Karagiannis
Internet-Draft                                      University of Twente
Intended status: Informational                               L. Westberg
Expires: September 8, 2010                             G. Apostolopoulos
                                                                Ericsson
                                                              A. Holtzer
                                                                     TNO
                                                           March 8, 2010






    PCN Boundary Node Behaviour for the HOSE Mode of
                               Operation
                  draft-karagiannis-pcn-hose-edge-behaviour-01

Abstract

   Precongestion notification (PCN) is a means for protecting quality of
   service for inelastic traffic admitted to a Diffserv domain.  The
   overall PCN architecture is described in RFC 5559.  This memo is one
   of a series describing possible boundary node behaviours for a PCN
   domain.  The behaviour described here is denoted as the HOSE model. 

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 8, 2010.








Karagiannis, et al.       Expires September 8, 2010             [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       PCN HOSE Boundary Node Behaviour       March 2010

Copyright Notice

  Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as 
   described in the BSD License.


Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


Table of Contents

1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    .  3
     1.1.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Assumed Core Network Behaviour for HOSE  . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Node Behaviours  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  Behaviour of the PCN-Egress-Node                       . .  8
       3.2.1.  PCN-Egress-Node Role In Normal and Flow 
               Admission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .10
       3.2.2.  PCN-Egress-Node Role in Flow 
               Termination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .11
    3.3.  Behaviour of the PCN decision point                     . . 13
       3.3.1.  PCN decision point Role In Normal and Flow 
               Admission . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .13
       3.3.2.  PCN decision point Role in Flow 
               Termination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .14
     3.4.  Behaviour of the PCN-Ingress-Node  . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       3.4.1.  PCN-Ingress-Node Role In Flow Admission  . . . . . . . 17
       3.4.2.  PCN-Ingress-Node Role In Flow Termination  . . . . . . 18
   4.  Specification of Diffserv Per-Domain Behaviour . . . . . . . . 18
     4.1.  Applicability  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     4.2.  Technical Specification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     4.3.  Attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     4.4.  Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     4.5.  Assumptions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     4.6.  Example Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
     4.7.  Environmental Concerns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19



Karagiannis, et al.      Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 2]


Internet-Draft       PCN HOSE Boundary Node Behaviour      March 2010


   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22


1.  Introduction


   The main objective of Pre-Congestion Notification (PCN) is to support 
   The quality of service (QoS) of inelastic flows within a Diffserv 
   domain, in a simple, scalable, and robust fashion.  Two mechanisms 
   are used: admission control and flow termination. Admission control 
   is used to decide whether to admit or block a new flow request, while 
   flow termination is used in abnormal circumstances to decide
   whether to terminate some of the existing flows.  To support these 
   two features the overall rate of PCN-traffic is metered on every link 
   in the domain, and PCN-packets are appropriately marked when certain
   configured rates are exceeded.  These configured rates are below the
   rate of the link thus providing notification to boundary nodes about
   overloads before any congestion occurs (hence "pre-congestion"
   notification).  The level of marking allows boundary nodes to make
   decisions about whether to admit or terminate.  For more details see
   [RFC5559].
   Boundary node behaviours specify a detailed set of algorithms and
   edge node behaviours used to implement the PCN mechanisms.  Since the
   algorithms depend on specific metering and marking behaviour at the
   interior nodes, it is also necessary to specify the assumptions made
   about interior node behaviour.  Finally, because PCN uses DSCP values
   to carry its markings, a specification of boundary node behaviour
   must include the per domain behaviour (PDB) template specified in
   [RFC3086], filled out with the appropriate content.  This document   
   describes this behaviour for the HOSE model of operation, see   
   e.g., [DuGo99].  In this document the term HOSE is referring to the 
   aggregation of incoming traffic from all ingress edges, which is 
   associated with one traffic class, i.e., PHB, towards one egress 
   edge.  This type of HOSE model is equivalent to the Multiple Point to 
   Point (MP2P) type of aggregation.
   The HOSE model ensures bandwidth limits without the need of
   maintaining per each ingress and egress pair ingress-egress-
   aggregated states.  In this case all edges maintain one aggregated
   state per each traffic class, i.e., PHB (Per Hop Behaviour), used in 
   the PCN domain. Moreover, the HOSE model is able to provide solutions 
   for the flow-based ECMP (Equal Cost Multi Path) problem for both 
   admission control and flow termination procedures. The assumption 
   here is made that ECMP performs flow-based multipath routing, see  
   [RFC2991] and [RFC2992].  


Karagiannis, et al.       Expires September 8, 2010            [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       PCN HOSE Boundary Node Behaviour       March 2010

1.1.  Terminology

   In addition to the terms defined in [RFC5559], this document uses the
   following terms:

   PCN decision point
      The node that makes the decision about which flows to admit and to
      terminate.  In a given network deployment, this may be the egress
      node or a centralized control node.  Of course, regardless of the
      location of the decision point, the ingress node is the point
      where the decisions are enforced.

   Admission block state
      The state ("admit" or "block") derived by PCN-egress-node 
      based on PCN packet marking statistics.  

   Flow termination state
      The operating state of the PCN edges during periods of severe 
      overload & congested situations. 

   Normal state
      The operating state of the PCN edges during periods when the PCN 
      edges are neither operating in Admission block state nor operating 
      in Flow termination state.

   Admission block decision threshold rate
      A rate value of ThM marked packets belonging to one PHB that are 
      received by a PCN-egress-node and is used for its comparison with 
      the measured ThM rate of packets received by the PCN-egress-node 
      and that are belonging to the same PHB. If the measured ThM rate 
      is higher than this threshold rate than the Normal state changes 
      to Admission block state. 

o "Egress_state"
      A two bit parameter used to specify the operational state of the 
      PCN-egress-node. 
      Egress Normal state: Egress_state =0;
      Egress Admission block state: Egress_state =1;
      Egress Flow termination state: Egress_state =2;

o "admit"
      A one bit Boolean parameter used to specify that a flow can be 
      admitted or rejected:
      Admit a flow: "admit" = 1;
      Reject a flow: "admit" = 0;

o "request_threshold_marked" 
      A one bit parameter used to specify that an on-path admission 
      control signaling request message is ThM marked.
      On-path admission control signaling request message 
      is ThM (or ETM) marked: "request_threshold_marked" = 1;


Karagiannis, et al.       Expires September 8, 2010            [Page 4]


Internet-Draft       PCN HOSE Boundary Node Behaviour       March 2010

      On-path admission control signaling request message 
      is PCN unmarked: "request_threshold_marked" = 0;


2.  Assumed Core Network Behaviour for HOSE

   This section describes the considered behaviour for nodes of the PCN-
   domain when acting in their role as PCN-interior-nodes.  The HOSE 
   mode of operation assumes that:

   o  encoding of PCN status within individual packets is based on
      [draft-ietf-pcn-3-state-encoding-01] (or on 
      [draft-ietf-pcn-3-in-1-encoding-01], extended to provide a 
      third PCN encoding state.

   o  the PCN domain satisfies the conditions specified in the 
      applicable encoding extension document;

   o  each link has been configured with a PCN-threshold-rate having a
      value equal to the PCN-admissible-rate for the link;

   o  each link has been configured with a PCN-excess-rate having a
      value equal to the PCN-supportable-rate for the link;

   o  PCN-interior-nodes perform threshold-marking and excess-traffic-
      marking of packets according to the rules specified in [RFC5670], 
      and any additional rules specified in the applicable encoding 
      extension document, with the following recommendations: 
        o in situations that the interior node is overloaded it is 
          RECOMMENDED that the interior SHOULD preferentially drop 
          unmarked packets instead of marked packets. This is required 
          since the marked packets are used at the egress to calculate 
          the excess rate during flow termination. The excess rate can 
          be accurately calculated at the egress when marked packets are 
          not dropped in the Core network.
  
  o   the signaling messages that are passing through a PCN-interior-
    node are treated, from the point of PCN encoding, identically as 
    the data packets that are processed by a PCN-interior-node. 
    However, the signaling messages SHOULD be processed with a higher 
    priority than data packets. This will ensure that in situations of 
    severe overload the signaling messages could have a higher chance 
    of not being dropped.

   According to [RFC5670], the encoding extension documents should 
   specify the allowable transitions between marking states.
   However, to be absolutely clear, these allowable transitions are
   specified here.  At any interior node, the only permitted transitions
   are the following:

   o  It MUST NOT change the not-PCN codepoint to any other codepoint.


Karagiannis, et al.      Expires September 8, 2010             [Page 5]


Internet-Draft       HOSE Boundary Node Behaviour            March 2010


   o  It MAY change any Not-marked codepoint to either the Threshold-
      marked or Excess-traffic-marked codepoints.

   o  It MUST NOT change a Not-marked codepoint to the not-PCN
      codepoint.

   o  A Not-marked codepoint MUST NOT be changed to any other Not-marked
      codepoint.

   o  It MAY change the ThM codepoint to the ETM codepoint but it MUST
      NOT change the ThM codepoint to any other codepoint.

   o  It MUST NOT change the ETM codepoint to any other codepoint.

   Obviously in every case a codepoint can remain unchanged.  The
   precise rules governing which valid transition to use are set out in
   [RFC5670].

3.  Node Behaviours

3.1.  Overview

   The HOSE model assumes that on-path admission control signalling 
   Messages, e.g., RSVP PATH, are used from a PCN-ingress-node towards a 
   PCN-egress-node. The HOSE mode of operation supports flow admission 
   based on the received ThM marked traffic rate, belonging to the same 
   PHB. If the ThM marked rate is higher than a predefined value then 
   the state at the PCN-egress-node changes from Normal to Admission 
   block state. The PCN-egress-node MUST be able to identify signalling 
   request messages and at the same time separate them from received 
   data packets. A flow is rejected if the following two conditions are 
   valid: 
       o the PCN decision point is informed that the PCN-egress-node 
         operates in Admission block state 
       o the PCN decision point is informed that the admission control 
         signalling request message is ThM marked. 
   
   By observing these two conditions, it is ensured that the aggregation 
   level of the measured ThM packets at the PCN-egress-node is 
   relatively high and accurate enough to identify that the PCN-egress-
   node operates in the Admission block state and at the same time it 
   ensures that the admission control signalling request message passed 
   through a PCN-interior-node that is in a congestion situation. The 
   PCN-egress-node informs the PCN decision point about the status of 
   these two conditions. 
   If the two conditions are satisfied then the PCN  decision point 
   informs the PCN-ingress-node that the flow is rejected. 





Karagiannis, et al.      Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       HOSE Boundary Node Behaviour           March 2010


   In the situation that the decision point is co-located with the PCN-
   egress-node then it is assumed that the PCN decision point tasks are 
   accomplished by the PCN-egress node. Furthermore, in this situation, 
   the PCN-ingress-node can be notified that the flow is rejected by 
   sending an on-path admission control signalling reply message, e.g., 
   RSVP PATHErr is used to notify that the PCN-ingress-node flow is 
   rejected. 

   If these two conditions are not satisfied then the flow is accepted 
   and the PCN-ingress-node is notified to accept the flow. 
   In the situation that the decision point is co-located with the PCN-
   egress-node then it is assumed that the PCN decision point tasks are 
   accomplished by the PCN-egress node. Furthermore, in this situation, 
   the PCN-ingress-node can be notified that the flow is accepted by 
   using an on-path admission control signalling reply message, e.g., 
   RSVP RESV is sent.
   
   Flow termination is triggered when the PCN-egress-node receives
   excess-traffic-marked (ETM) packets, belonging to the same PHB. The 
   PCN-egress-node calculates the rate of PCN-traffic contained in 
   received packets which are excess-traffic-marked. Moreover, the PCN-
   egress-node records the address identity of the PCN-ingress-node and 
   the identity of all the flows arriving at the PCN-egress-node, that 
   are ETM marked. Only these flows, which are the ones passing through 
   the severely overloaded  PCN-interior-node(s), are candidates for 
   termination. When operating in flow termination, the PCN-egress-node 
   sends at the end of each fixed-length measurement interval the rate 
   of the received packets which are excess traffic marked to the PCN 
   decision point. In addition to that, the PCN-egress-node sends 
   the identity and the reserved bandwidth of all the flows arriving at 
   the PCN-egress-node, that are ETM marked. The edge nodes keep per 
   flow state and therefore they have knowledge about the value of the 
   bandwidth that each flow had reserved.
   The PCN decision point uses the received excess-traffic-marked 
   rate (ETM) rate and calculates how many flows have to be terminated. 
   By using the received information from the PCN-egress-node, can 
   translate the calculated ETM rate to be terminated, to number of 
   flows. The PCN decision point informs each PCN-ingress-node about 
   which flows should be terminated by sending to each of them a list 
   with flows that have been selected for termination. 

   In the situation that the decision point is co-located with the PCN-
   egress-node, then it is assumed that the PCN-egress-node accomplishes 
   the above described PCN decision point tasks. Furthermore, in this 
   case, the list with flows that have been selected for termination can 
   be sent in a reliable way using an on-path, flow termination 
   signalling notify message, e.g., RSVP-TE Notify message. 
   An alternative solution to this is that the PCN-egress node sends a 
   signalling notify message for each flow that has to be terminated.
   The PCN-ingress-node, using admission control/flow termination 
   signalling procedures must terminate these flows.


Karagiannis, et al.      Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       HOSE Boundary Node Behaviour           March 2010


   This HOSE edge behaviour is able to provide solutions 
   for the ECMP (Equal Cost Multi Path) problem for both admission 
   control and flow termination procedures, when it is considered that 
   ECMP performs flow-based multipath routing. 
   ECMP [RFC2991] is a load balancing mechanism that allows packet flows 
   to be routed via multiple redundant paths, in case they have the same
   (intermediate) destination and equal cost routes to this destination 
   exist. ECMP is supported by various routing protocols, such as OSPF 
   and ISIS, and therefore may be present in transport networks, which 
   may also support PCN functionality. When PCN is used with e.g. the 
   baseline-encoding [RFC5696], the interior-node topology of the 
   transport network is hidden to the PCN edge nodes. 
   Therefore, in case of ECMP, the fact that several redundant paths may 
   exist between a single ingress-egress pair will not be noticed by 
   PCN. Instead, when packets of a flow are PCN-marked, for example, the 
   flow admission control mechanism of PCN may not admit any new flows 
   over all of those paths in the transport network, while in fact only 
   one of them may be congested. By introducing the mechanism as 
   proposed in this HOSE edge behaviour it will become possible for the 
   edge nodes to identify the actual congested paths and only prohibit, 
   or terminate flows (in case of flow termination) flows from using 
   those particular paths. The assumption here is made that ECMP 
   performs flow-based multipath routing using a deterministic 
   algorithm, such that all packets, including probe packets, associated 
   with a flow and used in the mechanism are sure to travel via the same 
   path as the same flow they are associated with. When for example the 
   ECMP mechanism described in [RFC2991] and [RFC2992] is used, this 
   assumption is valid.


3.2.  Behaviour of the PCN-Egress-Node 
  
 
   The egress node observes all PCN-traffic that it receives, ThM marked 
   traffic, excess marked-traffic (ETM) and PCN unmarked traffic in 
   order to define the state mode that the egress node is operating. 
   Based on this operation state the PCN-egress-node can assist the PCN    
   decision point to either admit, reject or terminate a flow. 
   It is considered that the PCN-egress-node, in addition to the 
   PCN-related functions described briefly in section 4.3 of [RFC5559] 
   is able to support the following: 

o  it measures the following rates during fixed-length measurement 
   intervals with a duration of T, where the duration is suggested 
   to be in the range of 50 to 100ms:
   
   NM_count:
      Number of bytes of PCN-traffic contained in received packets
      which are neither threshold-marked nor excess-traffic-marked.




Karagiannis, et al.      Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       HOSE Boundary Node Behaviour           March 2010


   ThM_count:
      Number of bytes of PCN-traffic contained in received packets
      which are threshold-marked.

   ETM_count:
      Number of bytes of PCN-traffic contained in received packets which 
      are excess-traffic-marked.
   
   NM_rate
      Rate of PCN-traffic contained in received packets
      which are neither threshold-marked nor excess-traffic-marked; 
      NM_rate = NM_count/T;

   ThM_rate
      Rate of PCN-traffic contained in received packets
      which are threshold-marked; ThM_rate = ThM_count/T;

   ETM_rate
      Rate of PCN-traffic contained in received packets which 
      are excess-traffic-marked; ETM_rate = ETM_count/T;

o Ablock_TH
      an admission block detection threshold rate is a predefined 
      ThM_rate that is used to detect whether a PCN-egress-node should 
      change from a Normal state to an Admission block  
      state or vice-versa. 


o it is considered that the used signaling messages sent from the 
  PCN-ingress-node towards the PCN-egress-node are following the data  
  path, i.e., the same communication path as the data packets sent from 
  the same PCN-ingress-node towards the same PCN-egress-node.

o it is able to differentiate signaling messages from data packets. 

o it is able to identify flows and to classify packets into flows.

o it is able to identify the identity (address information) of the 
  PCN-ingress-node that forwarded each flow. For example, in RSVP this 
  can be provided using RSVP PHOP.

o it is considered the signaling messages that are used for admission 
  control and flow termination purposes are PCN encoded in an identical 
  way as data packets. However, the signaling messages SHOULD be 
  processed with a higher priority than data packets. This will ensure 
  that in situations of severe overload the signaling messages could 
  have a higher chance of not being dropped.

The operation states & events in PCN-egress-nodes are shown in Figure 1. 




Karagiannis, et al.      Expires September 8, 2010              [Page 9]


Internet-Draft       HOSE Boundary Node Behaviour           March 2010


                 ---------------------------------------------
                |        event B                              |
                |                                             V
             ----------             -------------           ----------
            | Normal   |  event A  | Admission   | event B | Flow      |
            |  state   |---------->| block       |-------->|Termination|
            |          |           |  state      |         |  state    |
             ----------             -------------           ----------
                 ^                       |    ^                 |
                 |      event C          |    |   event D       |
                  -----------------------      -----------------
        
    Figure 1: States of operation

   o event A: when the PCN-egress-node receives a ThM rate that is   
     higher or equal than the admission block detection threshold rate 
     (Ablock_TH). Note that this predefined ThM threshold rate can be 
     set equal to a default rate that is equal to 1% of the rate 
     capacity of the link with lowest capacity within the whole PCN 
     domain.

   o event B: this event occurs when the PCN-egress-node receives 
     packets that are ETM marked.

   o event C: this event occurs when the rate of incoming ThM 
     bytes/packets decreases below the Ablock_TH.

   o event D: this event occurs when the egress, during an interval T, 
     does not receive ETM marked packets.

   The following sections give details of the egress node operation in 
   admission control and flow termination.

3.2.1 PCN-Egress-Node Role In Normal and Flow Admission

   When the PCN-egress-node operates in Normal state or in Admission 
   Block state then the NM_count, NM_rate, ThM_count and ThM_rate 
   variables are being calculated each measurement interval, T.  
   Furthermore, the following situations can be identified:

    o if the PCN-egress-node operates in Normal state and it receives an 
      admission control signaling request message forwarded by an PCN-
      ingress-node to check whether a flow can be admitted or not then 
      the PCN-egress-node MUST inform the PCN Decision Point using the 
      following parameters:

          o the value of the "egress_state" = 0 (Normal state)
          o the address identity of the flow that initiated the 
            admission control signaling request message



Karagiannis, et al.      Expires September 8, 2010             [Page 10]


Internet-Draft       HOSE Boundary Node Behaviour           March 2010

          o the address identity of the PCN-ingress-node from where the 
            admission control signaling request message has been sent.
          o the address identity of the PCN-egress-node that sends this 
            information.

    o if the PCN-egress-node operates in Admission block state and it 
      receives an admission control signaling request message that is
      PCN unmarked then the PCN-egress-node MUST inform the PCN Decision 
      Point using the following parameters:
:
          o the value of the "egress_state" = 1 (Admission block state)
          o the value of the "request_threshold_marked" = 0 
           (PCN unmarked)
          o the address identity of the flow that initiated the 
            admission control signaling request message
          o the address identity of the PCN-ingress-node from where the 
            admission control signaling request message has been sent.
          o the address identity of the PCN-egress-node that sends this 
            infdrmation.

    o if the PCN-egress-node operates in either Admission block state or 
      Flow termination state and it receives an admission control 
      signaling request message that is ThM (or ETM) marked then the 
      PCN-egress-node MUST inform the PCN Decision Point using the 
      following parameters:

          o the value of the "egress_state" =
              = 1 (in Admission block state) OR
              = 2 (in Flow termination state)
          o the value of the "request_threshold_marked" = 1 
           (ThM or ETM marked)
          o the address identity of the flow that initiated the 
            admission control signaling request message
          o the address identity of the PCN-ingress-node from where the 
            admission control signaling request message has been sent.
          o the address identity of the PCN-egress-node that sends this 
            information.


3.2.2 PCN-Egress-Node Role in Flow Termination

   When the PCN-egress-node detects an ETM packet, it changes its 
   operation state to Flow Termination state. As a result of 
   this transition, it immediately resets NM_count and ThM_count and 
   begins a new measurement interval. In addition, it begins to collect 
   the ETM_count and ETM_rate variables.

   The ETM_rate variable represents the bandwidth that causes an 
   overload on a communication path within the PCN domain.  



Karagiannis, et al.      Expires September 8, 2010             [Page 11]


Internet-Draft       HOSE Boundary Node Behaviour           March 2010


   In Flow termination, inaccuracies in excess rate measurements might
   occur due to the delay between the metering and marking event that
   occurs at the PCN-interior-nodes, the decisions that are made at PCN-
   egress-nodes, and the termination of flows that are performed by PCN-
   ingress-nodes, see section 6 in [CsTa05].  Furthermore, until the
   overload decreases at the PCN-interior-node such that the overload 
   situation is solved, an additional trip time from the PCN-ingress-
   node to this PCN-interior-node can expire.  This is because 
   immediately before receiving the flow termination notification, the 
   PCN-ingress-node may have sent out packets associated with the flows 
   that were selected for termination. Without considering the above, 
   PCN-interior-nodes would continue marking the packets until the 
   overload situation is solved. In this way, at the end more flows will 
   be terminated than necessary, i.e., an over-reaction takes place. 

   In order to solve these inaccuracies, the PCN- egress-nodes use a 
   sliding window memory to keep track of the measured ETM_rate in a 
   couple of previous measurement intervals. At the end of a measurement 
   interval, T, the bandwidth that needs to be terminated (denoted below 
   as termination_PCN_marking_rate) is calculated as follows. The 
   ETM_rate value measured  during one T interval is decreased with the 
   sum of already ETM_rate values stored in the sliding window memory, 
   since that bandwidth to be terminated is already being handled in the 
   flow termination handling control loop. The sliding window memory 
   consists of an integer number of cells, i.e, n =maximum number of 
   cells.  Thus the maximum size of the sliding window memory is 
   represented by n. Guidelines for configuring the sliding window 
   parameters are given in [CsTa05].  However, based on several 
   experiments that have been performed for the situation that the 
   sliding window is applied at the PCN-egress-node, it is recommended 
   that the best value that can be used for the sliding window size at 
   the egress is equal to 1, i.e., n = 1. At the end of each measurement 
   interval, the newest calculated ETM_rate is pushed into the memory 
   with maximum size n, and the oldest cell is dropped.

   If Mi is the ETM_rate stored in ith memory cell (i = [1..n]), then at 
   the end of every fixed-length measurement interval, the 
   termination_PCN_marking_rate variable that is used to calculate the 
   bandwidth that has to be terminated is calculated as follows:












Karagiannis, et al.      Expires September 8, 2010              [Page12]


Internet-Draft       HOSE Boundary Node Behaviour           March 2010


       Sum_Mi =0
       For i =1 to n
       {
         Sum_Mi = Sum_Mi + Mi
       }

       termination_PCN_marking_rate  =
              ETM_rate - Sum_Mi,

       where Sum_Mi is calculated as above.

       Next, the sliding memory is updated as follows:

       For i = 1..(n-1): Mi = Mi+1
              Mn = termination_PCN_marking_rate

   The PCN-egress-node records the identity of the PCN-ingress-node that 
   forwarded each flow, the ETM_rate and the identity of all the flows, 
   arriving at the PCN-egress-node, with ETM marking.

   Subsequently, the PCN-egress-node sends at the end of each fixed-
   length measurement interval the bandwidth that has to be terminated, 
   i.e., termination_PCN_marking_rate variable to the PCN decision 
   point. In addition to the termination_PCN_marking_rate information 
   the PCN-egress-node MUST send the following information:

          o the value of the "egress_state" = 2 (in Flow termination 
            state)
          o a list with: (1) flow identifiers, (2) reserved bandwidth 
          o the address identity of the PCN-egress-node that sends this 
            information.
          o address identity of the PCN-ingress-node from where 
            each individual flow passed and for which excess-
            marked packets have been observed. These can be used by the 
            decision point when it selects flows for termination.


3.3.  Behaviour of the PCN decision point

The decision point can fulfil two roles, one for flow admission and the other one for flow termination.

3.3.1 PCN decision point Role in Normal and Flow Admission

When the PCN decision point receives a report associated with an admission control signalling request message from the PCN-egress-node, it MUST parse and control the following parameters:





Karagiannis, et al.      Expires September 8, 2010              [Page13]


Internet-Draft       HOSE Boundary Node Behaviour           March 2010


      o If the following expression is TRUE then the PCN decision 
        point MUST accept the request: 

        ("egress_state" == "0") OR 
        [("egress_state" == "1") AND ("request_threshold_marked" == 0)]

        In this case the PCN decision point, uses the additional 
        information that has been sent by the PCN-egress-node, see 
        Section 3.2.1, and sends an admission control signaling reply 
        message, that carries an admission control "admit" = 1 value 
        towards the PCN-ingress-node that initiated 
        the request. In addition to this information the PCN 
        decision point includes the address identity of the PCN-
        egress-node that sent the "egress_state" information.
        In the situation that the decision point is co-located with 
        the PCN-egress-node then it is assumed that the PCN decision 
        point tasks are accomplished by the PCN-egress node. 
        Furthermore, in this situation, the PCN-ingress-node can be 
        notified that the flow is accepted by using an on-path 
        admission control signalling reply message, e.g., RSVP RESV 
        is sent.

      o If the following expression is TRUE then the PCN decision 
        point MUST reject the request: 
        ("request_threshold_marked" == 1) AND
        [("egress_state" == "1") OR ("egress_state" == "2")]

        In this case the PCN decision point, uses the additional 
        information that has been sent by the PCN-egress-node, see 
        Section 3.2.1, and sends an admission control signaling reply 
        message, that carries an admission control "admit" = 1 value 
        towards the PCN-ingress-node that initiated 
        the request. In addition to this information the PCN 
        decision point includes the address identity of the PCN-
        egress-node that sent the "egress_state" information.

        In the situation that the decision point is co-located with 
        the PCN-egress-node then it is assumed that the PCN decision 
        point tasks are accomplished by the PCN-egress node. 
        Furthermore, in this situation, the PCN-ingress-node can be  
        notified that the flow is rejected by sending an on-path 
        admission control signalling reply message, e.g., RSVP PATHErr 
        is used to notify that the PCN-ingress-node flow is rejected. 


3.3.2 PCN decision point Role in Flow Termination

   Not all operators will wish to deploy flow termination.  Hence
   deactivation of flow termination at the decision node MUST be a
   configurable option.


Karagiannis, et al.      Expires September 8, 2010              [Page14]


Internet-Draft       HOSE Boundary Node Behaviour           March 2010


   When the PCN decision point receives a flow termination report 
   message from the PCN-egress-node, it MUST parse and control all the 
   received information:

          o the bandwidth that has to be terminated, i.e., 
            termination_PCN_marking_rate.
          o the value of the "egress_state" = 2 (in Flow termination 
              state)
          o a list with: (1) flow identifiers, (2) reserved bandwidth 
          o the address identity of the PCN-egress-node that sends this 
            information.
          o address identity of the PCN-ingress-node from where 
            each individual flow passed and for which excess-
            marked packets have been observed. These can be used by the 
            decision point when it selects flows for termination.


   The PCN decision point uses the above information to ensure that a 
   PCN-egress-node operates in the Flow termination state and that only 
   the flows that are received by the same PCN-egress-node and the ones 
   passing through the severely overloaded interior node(s), are 
   candidates for termination. Furthermore, the reserved bandwidth 
   parameter (per notified flow) is used in order to translate 
   the calculated bandwidth to be terminated, to number of flows. 

   The selection of the flows to be terminated is described 
   in the pseudo-code that is given below, which is realized by the 
   function denoted below as calculate_terminate_flows().
   
    terminated_bandwidth = 0;
    while terminated_bandwidth < termination_PCN_marking_rate
    {
      terminate_bandwidth_class =
         termination_PCN_marking_rate - terminated_bandwidth
      calculate_terminate_flows();
      sum_bandwidth_terminate;
      terminated_bandwidth =
         sum_bandwidth_terminate + terminated_bandwidth;
    }

   The terminate_bandwidth_class variable represents the calculated 
   bandwidth that has to be translated in a number flows that should be 
   terminated. The calculate_terminate_flows() function uses the 
   terminate_bandwidth_class value and translates this bandwidth value 
   to number of flows that have to be terminated. Only the ETM marked 
   flows, which are the ones passing through the severely overloaded 
   interior node(s), are candidates for termination. After the flows to 
   be terminated are selected the sum_bandwidth_terminate value is 
   calculated that is the sum of the bandwidth associated with the flows 
   that will certainly be terminated. 


Karagiannis, et al.      Expires September 8, 2010              [Page15]


Internet-Draft       HOSE Boundary Node Behaviour           March 2010

   The constraint of finding the total number of flows that have to be 
   terminated is that the sum_bandwidth_terminate(priority_class) should 
   be smaller approximately equal to the variable 
   terminate_bandwidth_class. 

   Finally the PCN Decision Point informs each PCN-ingress-node about 
   which flows should be terminated by sending to each of them a list 
   with flow IDs of flows that have been selected for termination.

   In the situation that the decision point is co-located with the PCN-
   egress-node, then it is assumed that the PCN-egress-node accomplishes 
   the above described PCN decision point tasks. Furthermore, in this 
   case, the list with flows that have been selected for termination can 
   be sent in a reliable way using an on-path, flow termination 
   signalling notify message, e.g., RSVP-TE Notify message. 

   An alternative solution to this is that the PCN-egress node sends a 
   signalling notify message for each flow that has to be terminated.

   The reliable term means in this context that the PCN-egress-node
   should be informed, by using e.g., an acknowledgement that the flow 
   termination signalling notify message is successfully received by the 
   PCN-ingress-node.

3.4.  Behaviour of the PCN-Ingress-Node

   The PCN-related functions of the PCN-ingress-node are described
   briefly in section 4.2 of [RFC5559].  This section focuses on the
   specific behaviour associated with admission and flow termination.
   It is considered that the PCN-ingress-node, in addition to the PCN-
   related functions described briefly in section 4.2 of [RFC5559], is 
   able to support the following: 

   o it is considered that a signaling protocol can be used for 
     admission control and flow termination, to admit and reject new 
     flows and terminate ongoing flows. Furthermore, it is considered 
     that the signaling messages are using the same flow ID information 
     and PCN encoding states as the data packets associated with these 
     signalling messages.

   o it is considered that the used signaling messages sent from the 
     PCN-ingress-node towards the PCN-egress-node are following the data  
     path, i.e., the same communication path as the data packets sent 
     from the same PCN-ingress-node towards the same PCN-egress-node.

   o it is able to differentiate signaling messages from data packets. 

   o it is able to identify flows and to classify packets into flows.

   o it is able to identify the identity (address information) of the 
     PCN-egress-node that notifies the PCN-ingress-node about admission 
     control and flow termination decisions.

Karagiannis, et al.      Expires September 8, 2010             [Page 16]


Internet-Draft       HOSE Boundary Node Behaviour           March 2010


   o it is considered the signaling messages that are used for admission 
     control and flow termination purposes are PCN encoded in an 
   identical way as data packets. However, the signaling messages 
   SHOULD be processed with a higher priority than data packets. This 
   will ensure that in situations of severe overload the signaling 
   messages could have a higher chance of not being dropped.

 The operation states & events in PCN-ingress-nodes are shown in 
 Figure 2. 

   
           ----------                  -------------
           | Normal   |  event B      | Flow        | 
           |  state   |-------------->| termination |
           |          |               |  state      |
            ----------                 -------------
                ^                           |
                |      event E              |
                 ---------------------------

         Figure 2: State of operation at a PCN-ingress-node

The events used in Figure 2 and applied for PCN-ingress-nodes are:

   o  event B: this event occurs when the PCN-ingress-node receives one
      Flow termination signaling notification message, e.g., RSVT-TE 
      Notify, from the PCN-egress-node/Decision Point that one or more 
      flows have to be terminated. In Flow termination, and if the PCN-
      ingress-node is able to identify, for each new admission flow 
      request received from outside the PCN domain, to which PCN-egress-
      node is being destined, then the PCN-ingress-node SHOULD block all 
      new admission flow requests that are received by the PCN-ingress-
      node from outside the PCN domain towards the PCN-egress-nodes that 
      are operating in flow termination state.  
      Otherwise, the PCN-ingress-node SHOULD block all new admission 
      flow requests, that are received by the PCN-ingress-node from 
      outside the PCN domain and sent towards any PCN-egress-node.

   o event E: this event is activated after the moment that the
     signaling protocol informs the PCN-ingress-node that the 
     termination of all notified flows is completed. 

3.4.1.  PCN-Ingress-Node Role In Flow Admission

   The PCN-ingress-node receives an admission control signalling 
   request message belonging to an external to PCN, signalling protocol.  
   Subsequently, the PCN-ingress-node sends the admission control 
   signalling request message towards the PCN-egress-node.  
   



Karagiannis, et al.      Expires September 8, 2010             [Page 17]


Internet-Draft       HOSE Boundary Node Behaviour           March 2010


   When the PCN-ingress-node receives an admission control signalling 
   report message, e.g., RSVP RESV, that includes a report indicating 
   "admit", it admits the flow that requested access to the PCN domain.  
   When the PCN-ingress-node receives an admission control signalling 
   report message, e.g., RSVP PATHErr, that includes a report indicating 
   "block", it rejects the flow that requested access to the PCN domain. 


3.4.2.  PCN-Ingress-Node Role In Flow Termination

   The PCN-Ingress-Node changes its operation state from Normal to Flow 
   termination state when it receives one Flow termination signaling 
   notification message, e.g., RSVT-TE Notify, from the PCN-egress-
   node / PCN Decision Point that requires that one or more flows have 
   to be terminated. The flow IDs of the flows that must be terminated 
   are carried within a list by the flow termination signaling 
   notification message in a list. The signaling protocol SHOULD be used 
   to terminate all flows with flow IDs included in the received flow ID 
   list. 

   Moreover, in Flow termination, see event B, and if the PCN-ingress-
   node is able to identify, for each new admission flow request 
   received from outside the PCN domain, to which PCN-egress-node is 
   being destined, then the PCN-ingress-node SHOULD block all new 
   admission flow requests that are received by the PCN-ingress-node 
   from outside the PCN domain towards the PCN-egress-nodes that are 
   operating in flow termination state. Otherwise, the PCN-ingress-node 
   SHOULD block all new admission flow requests, that are received by 
   the PCN-ingress-node from outside the PCN domain and sent towards any 
   PCN-egress-node.

4.  Specification of Diffserv Per-Domain Behaviour

   This section provides the specification required by [RFC3086] for a
   per-domain behaviour.

4.1.  Applicability

   This section draws heavily upon points made in the PCN architecture
   document, [RFC5559].

   The HOSE boundary node behaviour specified in this document is
   applicable to inelastic traffic where the QoS for admitted flows is 
   protected primarily by admission control at the ingress to the 
   domain.  In exceptional circumstances (e.g. due to network failures) 
   already-admitted flows may be terminated to protect the quality of 
   service of the remainder on-going flows.




Karagiannis, et al.      Expires September 8, 2010             [Page 18]


Internet-Draft       HOSE Boundary Node Behaviour           March 2010


4.2.  Technical Specification

   The technical specification of the HOSE per domain behaviour is
   provided by the contents of [RFC5559], [RFC5696],
   [RFC5670], the specification of the 
   encoding extension (e.g., [draft-ietf-pcn-3-state-encoding-01],  
   [draft-ietf-pcn-3-in-1-encoding-01]) and the present document.

4.3.  Attributes

   The basic attributes are low loss and low jitter. 

4.4.  Parameters

   The relevant parameters are loss and jitter.

4.5.  Assumptions

   Assumed that a specific portion of link capacity has been reserved
   for PCN traffic.  Assumed that recovery from overloads by flow
   termination should happen within 1-3 seconds.

4.6.  Example Uses

   The HOSE behaviour may be used to carry real-time traffic,
   particularly voice and video.

4.7.  Environmental Concerns

   In some markets, traffic pre-emption is considered to be
   impermissible.  In such environments, flow termination would not be
   enabled.

5.  Security Considerations

   [RFC5559] provides a general description of the security
   considerations for PCN.  This memo introduces no new considerations.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


7.  Acknowledgements

   Parts of the content used in this memo are drawn from  
   [draft-westberg-pcn-load-control-05]. Therefore, we would like to 
   acknowledge the authors of that draft, which are: L. Westberg, A. 
   Bhargava, A. Bader, G. Karagiannis, H. Mekkes. 


Karagiannis, et al.      Expires September 8, 2010             [Page 19]


Internet-Draft       HOSE Boundary Node Behaviour           March 2010


   The template and parts of the text that are used in this memo are 
   based on the template used in [draft-ietf-pcn-cl-edge-behaviour-00]. 
   Therefore, we would like to acknowledge the authors of that draft,    
   which are: A, Charny, F. Huang, G. Karagiannis, M. Menth, T. Taylor.
   We would also like to acknowledge Ronald in 't Velt from TNO for 
   providing useful comments.


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC5696]  Moncaster, T., Briscoe, B., and M. Menth, "Baseline
              Encoding and Transport of Pre-Congestion Information", 
              RFC 5696, November 2009.
   
   [RFC5670]  Eardley, P., "Metering and marking behaviour of PCN-
              nodes", RFC 5670, November 2009.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2991]  D. Thaler, C. Hopps, "Multipath Issues in Unicast and 
              Multicast Next-Hop Selection", RFC 2991, November 2000.

   [RFC2992]  C. Hopps, "Analysis of an Equal-Cost Multi-Path 
              Algorithm", RFC 2992, November 2000.

   [RFC5559]  Eardley, P., "Pre-Congestion Notification (PCN)
              Architecture", RFC 5559, June 2009.


8.2.  Informative References

   [CsTa05]   Csaszar, A., Takacs, A., Szabo, R., and T. Henk,
              "Resilient Reduced-State Resource Reservation", Journal of
              Communication and Networks Vol. 7, Num. 4, December 2005.

   [draft-ietf-pcn-3-in-1-encoding-01]) 
              Briscoe, B., "PCN 3-State Encoding Extension in a single
              DSCP (Work in progress)", February 2010.
 
   [draft-ietf-pcn-3-state-encoding-01],  
              Moncaster, T., Briscoe, B., and M. Menth, "A PCN encoding
              using 2 DSCPs to provide 3 or more states (Work in
              progress)", February 2010.
 
    [draft-ietf-pcn-cl-edge-behaviour-02] T. Taylor, A, Charny, 
              F. Huang, G. Karagiannis, M. Menth, "PCN Boundary Node 
              Behaviour for the Controlled Load (CL) Mode of Operation 
              (Work in progress)", March 2010.

Karagiannis, et al.      Expires September 8, 2010            [Page 20]

Internet-Draft       HOSE Boundary Node Behaviour           March 2010


    [draft-westberg-pcn-load-control-05], L. Westberg, A. Bhargava, 
              A. Bader, G. Karagiannis, H. Mekkes, "LC-PCN: The Load 
              Control PCN Solution (Work in progress)", November 2008.

    [DuGo99]  Duffield, N. and P. Goyal, "A Flexible  Model for 
              Resource Management in Virtual Private", Proc. of 
              ACM/SIGCOMM pp. 95 - 108, December 1999.

    [RFC3086]  Nichols, K. and B. Carpenter, "Definition of
              Differentiated Services Per Domain Behaviors and Rules for
              their Specification", RFC 3086, April 2001.









































Karagiannis, et al.      Expires September 8, 2010            [Page 21]

Internet-Draft       HOSE Boundary Node Behaviour           March 2010

   Authors' Addresses

   Georgios Karagiannis
   University of Twente
   P.O. BOX 217
   7500 AE Enschede,
   The Netherlands
   EMail: g.karagiannis@ewi.utwente.nl

   Lars Westberg
   Ericsson AB
   SE-164 80 Stockholm
   Sweden
   EMail: Lars.Westberg@ericsson.com

   George Apostolopoulos
   Ericsson
   4333 Still Creek Dr.Burnaby,
   BC, V5C 6C6
   Canada
   Email: george.apostolopoulos@ericsson.com

   Arjen Holtzer
   TNO Information and Communication Technology
   Brassersplein 2
   Delft  2612CT
   The Netherlands
   Email: arjen.holtzer@tno.nl


























Karagiannis, et al.      Expires September 8, 2010            [Page 22]
