Conex Group                                                   D. McDysan
Internet Draft                                                   Verizon
Intended Status: Informational
Expires: April 17, 2011

                                                        October 17, 2010

           Proposed Additional Use Cases for Congestion Exposure

                 draft-mcdysan-conex-other-usecases-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 17, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.










McDysan                 Expires April 17, 2011                 [Page 1]

   Abstract

   This draft proposes some use cases for inclusion in the conex Working
   group charter's deliverable for an informational RFC covering use
   case description. These use cases are in addition to and/or
   complement those described in [UseCases], and focus on forms of
   congestion exposure that involve resources other than queues and
   timeframes other than real-time.

Table of Contents


   1. Introduction...................................................2
   2. Conventions used in this document..............................2
      2.1. Acronyms..................................................3
      2.2. Terminology...............................................3
   3. Motivation and Background......................................3
   4. Proposed Use Cases.............................................4
      4.1. Inequity of Heavy versus Light Users......................4
      4.2. Usage Tier/ Volume Feedback...............................4
      4.3. Feedback on Time of Day, Day of Week Charging.............5
      4.4. Recharging for Implementing Congestion Pricing............6
   5. Security Considerations........................................6
   6. IANA Considerations............................................6
   7. References.....................................................6
      7.1. Normative References......................................6
      7.2. Informative References....................................7
   8. Acknowledgments................................................7

1. Introduction

   This draft proposes some use cases for inclusion in the conex Working
   group charter's deliverable for an informational RFC covering use
   case description. These use cases are in addition to and/or
   complement those described in [UseCases], and focus on forms of
   congestion exposure that involve resources other than queues and
   timeframes other than real-time.

   Section 3 provides some motivational background and a statement of
   problems involved with congestion pricing, with references to the
   presentations by experts in this area at the IETF 78 Technical
   Plenary in Maastricht.

   Section 4 provides text for each of the above use cases in a
   mechanism independent manner.

2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119].



McDysan                 Expires April 17, 2011                 [Page 2]

2.1.  Acronyms

   conex congestion exposure

2.2. Terminology

   The following is a quote from the CONEX working group charter:

   " ... develop a mechanism by which senders inform the network about
   the congestion encountered by previous packets on the same flow ...
   at the IP layer, such that the total level of congestion is visible
   to all IP devices along the path"

3. Motivation and Background

   Successful adoption of experimental conex protocol(s) must address
   use cases that provide significant value to users, content providers
   and service providers. Central themes to this value proposition are
   incentives (i.e., congestion pricing) and the cost of providing
   marginal capacity [Varian, Johari].

   There are three time scales over which congestion pricing can operate
   [Johari]: short (milliseconds to seconds), medium (minutes to hours
   to days) and long (months to years). Currently, the short term
   congestion signal is lost packets or a specific indication of
   congestion of a particular resource (e.g., a ECN indication for queue
   congestion), as stated in the conex charter. Setting congestion price
   as the marginal value of capacity is useful for medium timescales via
   traffic engineering and longer time scales via provisioning [Johari].

   Some congestion exposure problems are challenging to address and are
   not completely addressed in [UseCases]:

   o   20% of the users generate 80% of the traffic and create
      unfairness with certain resource sharing [Varian]

   o   Volume-based pricing makes it difficult for users to manage costs
      incurred, [Varian], [Briscoe]

   o   Customers will pay a premium for unmetered use [Varian]

   o    A form of congestion pricing is "recharging" (e.g., "free
      shipping") [Varian], where someone other than the end user pays
      for incurred congestion.

   o   In general a content or service provider has hard capacity
      constraints at certain bottlenecks in their infrastructure (e.g.,
      server capacity, router interface/queue service rate). Some form
      of adaption, such as time-shifting, route-shifting, or moderating
      the demand is required to adapt to these constraints [Kelly].




McDysan                 Expires April 17, 2011                 [Page 3]

   If conex exposes congestion without damage (e.g., loss) then many
   forms of adaption are feasible, as long as incentives are aligned
   with the signaled congestion [Kelly]. The use cases in the next
   section focus on forms of adaption that enable certain sets of
   incentives that are not completely covered in [UseCases].

4. Proposed Use Cases

4.1. Inequity of Heavy versus Light Users

   In many networks, 20% are heavy users generating 80% of the traffic
   [Varian]. This means that a heavy user generates 16 times the traffic
   as a light user as a medium term (e.g, monthly) average. But, in a
   bandwidth-tiered flat priced network, heavy and light users often pay
   nearly the same price since pricing is based upon the short term
   (milliseconds) bandwidth measure of a shaper and/or a policer.

   During non-peak periods, the resources of a service or content
   provider are underutilized and the marginal cost of capacity is
   small.

   The access network is provisioned and traffic engineered for peak
   capacity of all users, and when congested, heavy users create 16
   times the congestion of small users.

   However, during peak use periods, a heavy user may send at near the
   bandwidth tier while light users may send intermittently. There is a
   need for a means for service providers to equitably assign costs to
   heavy versus light users. For example, the light users may pay less
   if they were charged by volume, as described in another use case.

   A congestion measure of burstiness (e.g., ratio of peak rate to
   average rate over a longer interval than the tiered bandwidth shaper
   or policer) could be helpful in this use case. In general, a bursty
   packet flow is light (e.g., web surfing) and a non-bursty packet flow
   is heavy (e.g., viewing a lengthy HD video). The destination could
   perform this measure and feed it back to the sender. It may only be
   necessary to feedback this measure for heavy users, since the absence
   of such feedback could be inferred as an indication of a light user.
   The sender could insert some processed version of this feedback
   measure this at the IP layer so that all IP devices could be aware of
   whether this is a heavy or light user.

4.2. Usage Tier/ Volume Feedback

   Long-term (e.g., monthly) usage volume based pricing can more
   equitably assign costs to the prices paid, but;

   o  is complex for users to keep track of usage and manage their
      activity to control the price they pay for access [Varian],
      [Briscoe],



McDysan                 Expires April 17, 2011                 [Page 4]

   o  does not address situation where heavy users send at a high rate,
      but only for a fraction of the usage measurement interval (e.g.,
      only for a few hours or days during a month).

   o  If usage counting is performed differently dependent upon the
      amount of congestion incurred (i.e., some form of congestion
      pricing as an incentive), then feedback is more important since in
      general users will not know when congestion is occurring, and even
      if they were informed this makes their usage tracking problem even
      more complex.

   If usage volume information could be fed forward from an IP device
   using a conex mechanism on the path from senders to a destination,
   then this information could be fed back from the destination to the
   sender using TCP as stated in the Conex charter. Such information
   could include: the duration of the usage volume measurement tier
   (e.g., a month), the fraction of the usage tier already used,
   estimate of whether the user will exceed the usage tier if the
   historical rate to date continues, and any other information (or a
   pointer to such information) that would address the challenges of
   usage tier based pricing.

   There are instances where a service/ content provider may choose to
   not count certain packets against the volume tier, such as when there
   is no congestion occurring, recharging is being done for this packet
   flow, and/or there is no usage counting being done for this time of
   day/week. A secure means to feed such information forward at the IP
   layer would allow for a number of different forms of counting, and
   hence adaption to congestion to occur.

4.3. Feedback on Time of Day, Day of Week Charging

   Congestion occurs when the offered load approaches that of the
   provisioned capacity, which often does not occur until shortly before
   there would be a need to provision additional capacity. Depending
   upon how restoration capacity is allocated by a service/content
   provider, congestion may only occur during peak periods when a
   failure is present.

   Without Conex, utilization averaged over several minutes can be as
   high as 70 to 80% in typical network bottlenecks without loss that
   would reduce TCP effective throughput (i.e., goodput). A short term
   congestion control (sub-second to seconds) method that could increase
   utilization to above 90% and still avoid loss would only increase
   effective capacity by 10-20%.

   If traffic increases at 50-75% per year, then a 10-20% increase in
   effective capacity means that the provisioning interval is only
   shifted by a few months.  This handling of short term congestion use
   case alone may not be sufficient motivation for a service provider to
   deploy congestion handling measures.



McDysan                 Expires April 17, 2011                 [Page 5]

   However, in many points of a network, the majority of usage occurs
   during peak periods (e.g, a few busy hours) while much spare capacity
   exists off peak. The product of the spare capacity (bits/second) and
   the non-peak interval (seconds) that could carry traffic ranges from
   2 to 10 times of the traffic carried during the peak period.

   Congestion exposure and congestion pricing that enables users and
   content providers to time shift traffic to off-peak periods that
   would have otherwise been sent during peak periods can reduce
   provisioned capacity cost by as much as several hundred percent.

   Historical time of day usage patterns could be employed to time shift
   traffic, but often maintenance actions are performed during the off
   peak periods, making the prediction of congestion using these methods
   less reliable. An automatic method for detection of congestion during
   off-peak periods is highly desirable.

4.4. Recharging for Implementing Congestion Pricing

   There should be a means to recharge (i.e., someone other than the
   receiving user pays) for usage that causes congestion during peak
   demand period versus that which does not [Varian].

   If TCP were augmented with information related to the form of
   congestion, including not only short term as covered in [UseCases],
   but also including usage tier, Time of Day, or burstiness then
   sufficient information to implement sender pays (e.g., Content
   provider)versus receiver pays (e.g., end user) could be implemented.
   When the sender includes this information in the IP layer, then usage
   tier counting and TOD counting could be accounted for differently in
   IP devices in the path between sender and destination. Such an
   indication of recharging would need be to be authenticated in some
   way.

5. Security Considerations

   Some use cases involve indications that could be spoofed or used to
   game counting and congestion feedback mechanisms, and therefore an
   authentication mechanism is needed when this information is handled
   at the IPv6 layer in the sender to destination direction or at the
   TCP layer in the destination to sender direction.

6. IANA Considerations

   None

7. References

7.1. Normative References

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.


McDysan                 Expires April 17, 2011                 [Page 6]

7.2. Informative References

   [UseCases] B. Briscoe, R. Woundy, T. Moncaster, Ed., J. Leslie, Ed.,
   "ConEx Concepts and Use Cases," draft-moncaster-conex-concepts-uses-
   01, Work in Progress

   [Varian] Hal Varian, Google, "Congestion pricing principles," IETF 78
   Technical Plenary, 29 July 2010

   [Kelly] Frank Kelly, University of Cambridge, "Economic perspectives
   on congestion," IETF 78 Technical Plenary, 29 July 2010

   [Johari] Ramesh Johari, Stanford University, "The information in
   congestion prices: milliseconds to years," IETF 78 Technical Plenary,
   29 July 2010

   [Briscoe] Bob Briscoe, BT, "Congestion Exposure," IETF 78 Technical
   Plenary, 29 July 2010.

8. Acknowledgments

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as authors
   of the code. All rights reserved.

   THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
   "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
   LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
   A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
   OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
   SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
   LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
   DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
   THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
   (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
   OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

   This code was derived from IETF RFC [insert RFC number]. Please
   reproduce this note if possible.

Authors' Addresses

      Dave McDysan
      Verizon
      22001 Loudoun County PKWY
      Ashburn, VA  20147
      Email: dave.mcdysan@verizon.com






McDysan                 Expires April 17, 2011                 [Page 7]

