Conex Group                                                   D. McDysan
Internet Draft                                                   Verizon
Intended Status: Informational
Expires: September 7, 2011

                                                           March 7, 2011

        Usage/Volume Tier Feedback Use Case for Congestion Exposure

               draft-mcdysan-conex-volumetier-usecase-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 17, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.










McDysan               Expires September 7, 2011                [Page 1]

   Abstract

   As requested in the Beijing meeting, this is an individual draft that
   expands on the usage tier/volume use case from [McDysan]. The
   feedback recorded in the Beijing conex meeting minutes was that a
   number of people were potentially interested in this use case, but
   that it was out of scope of the current charter, and/or could
   potentially be built out of the conex abstract mechanism.

Table of Contents


   1. Introduction...................................................2
   2. Conventions used in this document..............................3
      2.1. Acronyms..................................................3
      2.2. Terminology...............................................3
   3. Motivation and Background......................................3
   4. Usage Tier/ Volume Feedback....................................3
      4.1. Problem Statement.........................................4
      4.2. Objectives for Addressing this Issue......................4
      4.3. Potential Support Using Abstract Mechanism................5
      4.4. Additional Support Using other Measures and Mechanisms....5
   5. Security Considerations........................................7
   6. IANA Considerations............................................7
   7. References.....................................................8
      7.1. Normative References......................................8
      7.2. Informative References....................................8
   8. Acknowledgments................................................9

1. Introduction

   As requested in the Beijing meeting, this is an individual draft that
   expands on the usage tier/volume use case from [McDysan]. The
   feedback recorded in the Beijing conex meeting minutes was that a
   number of people were interested in this idea, but that it was out of
   scope of the current charter, and/or could potentially be built out
   of the conex abstract mechanism.

   Section 3 provides some motivational background and a statement of
   relevant problems involved with congestion pricing.

   Section 4 provides text for the usage/volume tier feedback use case.
   It contains a section that covers a problem statement, objectives for
   resolving this issue, potential approaches for implementing this use
   case employing currently defined conex mechanisms, and a description
   of additional measures and mechanisms that could solve the stated
   problem and issues.







McDysan               Expires September 7, 2011                [Page 2]

2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119].

         2.1.  Acronyms

   conex = congestion exposure

         2.2. Terminology

   The following is a quote from the CONEX working group charter:

   " ... develop a mechanism by which senders inform the network about
   the congestion encountered by previous packets on the same flow ...
   at the IP layer, such that the total level of congestion is visible
   to all IP devices along the path"

3. Motivation and Background

   This section provides references to relevant presentations given by
   experts on congestion pricing from the IETF 78 Technical Plenary in
   Maastricht. A significant number of ISPs implement some form of
   usage/volume caps in at least some parts of the world [NewAmerica].

   The congestion exposure problems addressed in this document are:

   o  Volume-based pricing makes it difficult for users to manage costs
      incurred, [Varian]

   o  Customers will pay a premium for unmetered use [Varian]

   There are three time scales over which congestion pricing can operate
   [Johari]: short (milliseconds to seconds), medium (minutes to hours
   to days) and long (months to years). Currently, the short term
   congestion signal is lost packets or a specific indication of
   congestion of a particular resource (e.g., a ECN indication for queue
   congestion), as stated in the conex charter, [UseCases] and
   [Mechanism]. Usage/Volume tier pricing is typically of a long
   timescale (months), but users may be able to make effective of
   shorter time scale feedback (minutes to hours).

4. Usage Tier/ Volume Feedback

   Usage/volume caps may be arranged into multiple tiers with different
   pricing based upon monthly volume. This results in some problems as
   described in the next section. Next, high-level objectives to address
   these issues are then proposed. Then potential ways that already
   defined means [Mechanisms] may be employed are described. Finally, to
   address some of these issues, other measures and mechanisms that
   could possibly better meet the objectives are described.


McDysan               Expires September 7, 2011                [Page 3]

         4.1. Problem Statement

   Long-term (e.g., monthly) usage/volume based pricing is a widely used
   incentive, but it creates the following issues;

   o  It is complex for users to keep track of usage and manage their
      activity to control the price they pay for access [Varian]

   o  It does not address the situation where heavy users [Usecases]
      send at a high rate, but only for a fraction of the usage
      measurement interval (e.g., only for a few hours or days during a
      month).

   o  If usage/volume counting is performed differently dependent upon
      the degree of congestion experienced, then feedback is more
      important since in general users will not know when congestion is
      occurring.

   o  If a user marks packets as requesting lower effort [LowerEffort],
      then an incentive could be to not count (or count in a different
      way) packets marked as lower effort against a usage/volume tier.
      Some way of ensuring that packets marked as lower effort do not
      significantly impact packets marked as best (or better) effort.

         4.2. Objectives for Addressing this Issue

   Provide a way to inform a receiver of the usage/volume incurred to a
   moment in time. Ideally, this would also include the usage/volume
   time period (e.g., a month).

   Provide a way to inform a receiver of a trend that if usage continues
   at the same rate then a specific usage/volume tier will be crossed.

   Indicate to a receiver whether usage/volume counting is occurring in
   a different way when congestion measure of a particular form (e.g.,
   loss, ECN marking) is occurring.

   Standardize a way to mark packets in a way (e.g., [Lower Effort]) in
   conjunction with some form of conex signaling that indicates
   usage/volume counting will not occur (or are counted separately)
   under the condition that these packets do not create congestion. A
   means to ensure that these marked packets do not create congestion
   and do not impact best (and better) effort marked packets is also
   required.

   Enable a means for recharging to occur, where usage/volume counting
   does not occur for the receiving user since some other party has
   agreed to incur the cost of usage/volume for that flow.






McDysan               Expires September 7, 2011                [Page 4]

         4.3. Potential Support Using Abstract Mechanism

   The conex abstract mechanism [Mechanism] defines implicit signaling
   of loss and explicit signaling of ECN marking. It also defines re-
   echoed signal for loss and ECN marking based upon feedback carried by
   TCP from a receiver back to the sender (in an RFC to be developed by
   the conex wg as defined in the charter). If this feedback mechanism
   is designed to be extensible, then a variety of forms of feedback
   could be developed for use in experiments.

   Counting usage/volume differently for congested packets (or congested
   intervals) based upon [Mechanism] re-echoed congestion experienced
   signals seems straightforward. This could be a local matter for the
   IP node which implements usage/volume tier counting.

   Also, counting packets marked as Lower Effort differently is a local
   matter. How to ensure that these packets do not interfere with best
   effort could be implemented by Diffserv methods locally and at other
   potential bottlenecks.

   Since packets subject to counting in a usage/volume cap may not occur
   during congestion intervals, reinsertion of such counting information
   using the re-echoed signals that indicate congestion does not seem
   possible since the same bits cannot represent usage counting and
   congestion experienced.

   What is missing from the current conex mechanism is a feed forward
   path operating over a longer timescale that contains sufficient
   information to meet the objectives.

         4.4. Additional Support Using other Measures and Mechanisms

   Usage/volume counting has some aspects similar to that of a
   congestible queue, but on a much longer timescale, as follows:

   o  Instead of a queue which is typically sized for O(10 ms) at the
      sending rate, usage/volume counting occurs on a timescale O(month.

   o  A usage/volume tier is a threshold on a long term usage counter,
      similar to the way ECN marking can be a threshold on in a queue.

   o  Queue loss is similar to a usage/volume counter crossing from one
      tier into the next.

   o  A usage/volume tier trend warning is similar to a rate estimate
      for ECN marking based upon queue fill rate, as is described in
      PCN.

   Therefore, in an abstract way a usage/volume counter can be viewed as
   a congestible resource, but in some ways not the same as a
   congestible queue. If this information is to be fed forward in a way
   observable at the IP layer and fed back at the transport layer (e.g.,


McDysan               Expires September 7, 2011                [Page 5]

   TCP), then additional packet and transport fields and/or mechanisms
   may be better suited to this purpose.

   Furthermore, instead of feeding forward information in each IPv6
   packet as in [Mechanism], usage/volume congestible resource
   information can occur much less frequently (e.g., many minutes to
   hours). The following is an outline of such measures and mechanisms.

   The basic idea is based on the fact that the sender and receiver need
   to be cooperating using the same experimental extensions to TCP, and
   that if TCP can carry some of the additional information, then the
   scarcity of IPv6 header bits is avoided. Furthermore, as described
   previously, "fast path" processing is not required for this use case
   and the hop-by-options field of the IPv6 header could be used
   [RFC2460], [IPv6Format] with "slow path" processing used instead. A
   mechanism to allow the experimental sender to send a "probe" in the
   IPv6 packet (e.g., using an experimental IPv6 protocol type) could be
   used by a intermediate IP node(s) to forward the "probe" packet to a
   special processor (which may be separate from the routers'
   processor). This special processor could use a polled version of
   usage/volume count information per user and could also be configured
   with subscription information (e.g., usage/volume cap tier, cap
   duration), and threshold settings.

   The handling of this "probe" IPv6 packet and associated TCP segment
   needs to be done within the TCP flow. It could use an Out Of Band
   mechanism similar to the urgent data capability in TCP. (For example,
   an experimental usage of the Urgent bit could possibly be employed.)
   The special processor could insert additional measures and implement
   some of the proposed mechanisms and then modify/augment the "probe"
   TCP (urgent-like) segment with the requested information and forwards
   this modified "probe" packet toward the receiver via the intermediate
   IP node. Packets from the receiver back to the sender could be sent
   directly, or could be directed through the special processor at
   intermediate node(s), depending upon the specifics of the use case
   involved.

   A consequence of the above extension of measures and mechanisms is
   that the sender and receiver now have much more information which
   could be used to solve the stated problems and meet the objectives.

   The information carried in a "probe" TCP segment could include:

   o  The service being requested, for example:

       o Request information on the users' usage/volume tier

       o Request statistics on usage

       o Request threshold trend report

       o Request not counting this flow since it is lower effort


McDysan               Expires September 7, 2011                [Page 6]

       o Request recharging

   o  Information that could be provided by the "special processor"
      includes:

       o Duration and cap for the usage volume measurement tier (e.g., a
          month)

       o The absolute count of packets and octets received/sent, and/or
          fraction of the usage tier already used

       o Count of packets and octets received/sent which experienced
          congestion

       o Count of packet and octets received/sent that were marked as
          Lower Effort

       o Estimate of whether the user will exceed the usage tier if the
          historical usage rate to the reporting instant continues

       o A pointer (e.g., URL) and identification of the authentication
          method that would enable other queries, and/or implement
          alternative charging methods (e.g., recharging)

       o Other measures related to the "congestion" of a usage/volume
          tier use case (or possibly other use cases as well).

   One example of a different type of measure is described in
   [Stanojevic]. In this paper, the Shapley value [Shapley] is used
   instead of a 95-th percentile measure of hourly usage measurements
   across a month. The Shapley value has the following desirable
   intuitive properties [Shapley]: individual fairness, efficiency,
   symmetry and additivity. Although the 95-th percentile measure is not
   directly related to the usage/volume tier use case, the authors state
   that this is a case they plan to address in future research. A
   mapping, such as an approximation to the Shapley value described in
   this paper, could be a way to compress the usage/volume tier feed
   forward/ feedback information into a smaller number of bits that
   represents the incentives described in the objectives section.

5. Security Considerations

   In the proposed mechanisms there are indications that could be
   spoofed and/or used to game counting and congestion feedback
   mechanisms, and therefore an authentication mechanism may be needed
   when this information is handled at the TCP/IPv6 layer in the sender
   to destination direction or at the TCP layer in the destination to
   sender direction.

6. IANA Considerations

   None


McDysan               Expires September 7, 2011                [Page 7]

7. Acknowledgements

   The idea of not counting lower effort traffic against a usage/volume
   cap was suggested my Mikael Abrahamsson on the conex mailing list.

8. References

         8.1. Normative References

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

         8.2. Informative References

   [UseCases] B. Briscoe, R. Woundy, T. Moncaster, Ed., J. Leslie, Ed.,
   "ConEx Concepts and Use Cases," draft-moncaster-conex-concepts-uses-
   01, Work in Progress

   [Mechanism] M. Mathis, B. Briscoe, "Congestion Exposure (ConEx)
   Concepts and Abstract Mechanism," draft-mathis-conex-abstract-mech-
   00, Work in Progress

   [Varian] Hal Varian, Google, "Congestion pricing principles," IETF 78
   Technical Plenary, 29 July 2010

   [Johari] Ramesh Johari, Stanford University, "The information in
   congestion prices: milliseconds to years," IETF 78 Technical Plenary,
   29 July 2010

   [NewAmerica] Li, Losey, "Bandwidth Caps for Residential High- Speed
   Internet in the U.S. and Japan," August 2009,
   http://www.newamerica.net/files/Bandwidth%20Caps%20for%20High-
   Speed%20Internet%20in%20the%20U.S.%20and%20Japan.pdf

   [LowerEffort] R. Bless, K. Nichols, K. Wehrle, "A Lower Effort Per-
   Domain Behavior (PDB) for Differentiated Services," RFC3662, December
   2003

   [RFC2460]   S. Deering, R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
   (IPv6) Specification," RFC 2460  December 1998

   [IPv6Format] S. Krishnan, M. Kuehlewind, "IPv6 Format," Presentation
   at conex wg at IETF 79, Beijing

   [Stanojevic] Stanojevic, Laoutaris, Rodriguez, Telefonica Research,
   "On Economic Heavy Hitters: Shapley value analysis of 95th-percentile
   pricing," IMC'10, November 1-3, 2010, Melbourne, Australia,
   http://conferences.sigcomm.org/imc/2010/papers/p75.pdf

   [Shapley] Wikipedia, "Shapley value,"
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shapley_value



McDysan               Expires September 7, 2011                [Page 8]

9. Acknowledgments

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as authors
   of the code. All rights reserved.

   THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
   "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
   LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
   A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
   OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
   SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
   LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
   DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
   THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
   (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
   OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

   This code was derived from IETF RFC [insert RFC number]. Please
   reproduce this note if possible.

Authors' Addresses

      Dave McDysan
      Verizon
      22001 Loudoun County PKWY
      Ashburn, VA  20147
      Email: dave.mcdysan@verizon.com

























McDysan               Expires September 7, 2011                [Page 9]

