Conex Group                                                   D. McDysan
Internet Draft                                                   Verizon
Intended Status: Informational
Expires: September 5, 2012

                                                           March 5, 2012

        Potential Use Cases of Internet Congestion Control Research

                    draft-mcdysan-iccrg-usecases-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 17, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.










McDysan               Expires September 5, 2012                [Page 1]

   Abstract

   This draft proposes some use cases for consideration by the iccrg.
   These use cases are in addition to and/or complement those described
   by the conex working group[UseCases]. The conex working group had
   determined that these use cases were out of scope of the current
   charter, and/or could potentially be built out of the conex abstract
   mechanism. The focus of the use cases in this draft is on forms of
   congestion exposure that involve resources other than queues and
   timeframes other than real-time. Background and motivation for these
   use cases is first discussed. Expanded material on the usage
   tier/volume use case is also provided.

Table of Contents


   1. Introduction...................................................2
   2. Conventions used in this document..............................3
      2.1. Acronyms..................................................3
      2.2. Terminology...............................................3
   3. Motivation and Background......................................4
   4. Potential Use Cases for Experimental Research..................5
      4.1. Inequity of Heavy versus Light Users......................5
      4.2. Feedback on Time of Day, Day of Week Charging.............6
      4.3. Recharging for Implementing Congestion Pricing............7
      4.4. Usage Tier/ Volume Feedback...............................7
         4.4.1. Objectives for Addressing this Issue.................7
         4.4.2. Potential Support Using Abstract Mechanism...........8
         4.4.3. Additional Support Using other Measures and Mechanisms9
   5. Security Considerations.......................................11
   6. IANA Considerations...........................................11
   7. Acknowledgements..............................................11
   8. References....................................................11
      8.1. Normative References.....................................11
      8.2. Informative References...................................11
   9. Acknowledgments...............................................12

1. Introduction

   This draft proposes some use cases for inclusion in the conex Working
   group charter's deliverable for an informational RFC covering use
   case description. These use cases are in addition to and/or
   complement those described in [UseCases], and focus on forms of
   congestion exposure that involve resources other than queues and
   timeframes other than real-time.

   Section 3 provides some motivational background and a statement of
   problems involved with congestion pricing, with references to the
   presentations by experts in this area at the IETF 78 Technical
   Plenary in Maastricht.




mcdysan-iccrg-usecases-00   Expires September 5, 2012          [Page 2]

   Section 4 provides text for each of the above use cases in a
   mechanism independent manner.



   As requested in the Beijing meeting, this is an individual draft that
   expands on the usage tier/volume use case from [McDysan]. The
   feedback recorded in the Beijing conex meeting minutes was that a
   number of people were interested in this idea, but that it was out of
   scope of the current charter, and/or could potentially be built out
   of the conex abstract mechanism.

   Section 3 provides some motivational background and a statement of
   relevant problems involved with congestion pricing.

   Section 4 provides text for the usage/volume tier feedback use case.
   It contains a section that covers a problem statement, objectives for
   resolving this issue, potential approaches for implementing this use
   case employing currently defined conex mechanisms, and a description
   of additional measures and mechanisms that could solve the stated
   problem and issues.

2. Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 [RFC2119].

2.1.  Acronyms

   conex = congestion exposure

2.2. Terminology

   The following is a quote from the CONEX working group charter:

   " ... develop a mechanism by which senders inform the network about
   the congestion encountered by previous packets on the same flow ...
   at the IP layer, such that the total level of congestion is visible
   to all IP devices along the path"

   Despite its central role in network control and management,
   congestion is a remarkably hard concept to define.  The discussions
   in [Bauer09] provide a good academic background.  [RFC6077] defines
   it as "as a state or condition that occurs when network resources are
   overloaded, resulting in impairments for network users as objectively
   measured by the probability of loss and/or delay."  An economist
   might define it as the condition where the utility of a given user
   decreases due to an increase in network load. The economic
   implications are obviously different for an end user versus a service
   provider.



mcdysan-iccrg-usecases-00   Expires September 5, 2012          [Page 3]

3. Motivation and Background

   This section provides references to relevant presentations given by
   experts on congestion pricing from the IETF 78 Technical Plenary in
   Maastricht.

   Successful adoption of experimental congestion
   pricing/exposure/information sharing protocol(s) must address use
   cases that provide significant value to users, content providers and
   service providers. Central themes to this value proposition are
   incentives (i.e., congestion pricing) and the cost of providing
   marginal capacity [Varian, Johari].

   There are three time scales over which congestion pricing can operate
   [Johari]: short (milliseconds to seconds), medium (minutes to hours
   to days) and long (months to years). Currently, the short term
   congestion signal is lost packets or a specific indication of
   congestion of a particular resource (e.g., a ECN indication for queue
   congestion), as stated in the conex charter. Setting congestion price
   as the marginal value of capacity is useful for medium timescales via
   traffic engineering and longer time scales via provisioning [Johari].

   Some congestion exposure problems are challenging to address and are
   not completely addressed in conex [UseCases]:

   o   20% of the users generate 80% of the traffic and create
      unfairness with certain resource sharing [Varian]

   o   Volume-based pricing makes it difficult for users to manage costs
      incurred, [Varian]. Note that a significant number of ISPs
      implement some form of usage/volume caps in at least some parts of
      the world [NewAmerica].

   o   Customers will pay a premium for unmetered use [Varian]

   o    A form of congestion pricing is "recharging" (e.g., "free
      shipping") [Varian], where someone other than the end user pays
      for incurred congestion.

   o   In general a content or service provider has hard capacity
      constraints at certain bottlenecks in their infrastructure (e.g.,
      server capacity, router interface/queue service rate). Some form
      of adaption, such as time-shifting, route-shifting, or moderating
      the demand is required to adapt to these constraints [Kelly].

   If conex exposes congestion without damage (e.g., loss) then many
   forms of adaption are feasible, as long as incentives are aligned
   with the signaled congestion [Kelly]. The use cases in the next
   section focus on forms of adaption that enable certain sets of
   incentives that are not completely covered in [UseCases].




mcdysan-iccrg-usecases-00   Expires September 5, 2012          [Page 4]

4. Potential Use Cases for Experimental Research

   The following use cases have been deemed to be out of scope for the
   current conex wg charter. They may be candidates for specific areas
   of research

4.1. Inequity of Heavy versus Light Users

   In many networks, 20% are heavy users generating 80% of the traffic
   [Varian]. This means that a heavy user generates 16 times the traffic
   as a light user as a medium term (e.g, monthly) average. But, in a
   bandwidth-tiered flat priced network, heavy and light users often pay
   nearly the same price since pricing is based upon the short-term
   (milliseconds) bandwidth measure of a shaper and/or a policer.

   During non-peak periods, the resources of a service or content
   provider are underutilized and the marginal cost of capacity is
   small.

   The access network is provisioned and traffic engineered for peak
   capacity of all users, and when congested, heavy users create 16
   times the congestion of small users.

   However, during peak use periods, a heavy user may send at near the
   bandwidth tier while light users may send intermittently. There is a
   need for a means for service providers to equitably assign costs to
   heavy versus light users. For example, the light users may pay less
   if they were charged by volume, as described in another use case.

   A congestion measure of burstiness (e.g., ratio of peak rate to
   average rate over a longer interval than the tiered bandwidth shaper
   or policer) could be helpful in this use case. In general, a bursty
   packet flow is light (e.g., web surfing) and a non-bursty packet flow
   is heavy (e.g., viewing a lengthy HD video). The destination could
   perform this measure and feed it back to the sender. It may only be
   necessary to feedback this measure for heavy users, since the absence
   of such feedback could be inferred as an indication of a light user.
   The sender could insert some processed version of this feedback
   measure this at the IP layer so that all IP devices could be aware of
   whether this is a heavy or light user.

   The following use case is an example of how the conex indication of
   congestion may be useful to handle the heavy versus light user case.
   The following was based upon discussions with Toby Moncaster.

   Over a time period related to the statistical multiplexing or
   economic congestion interval (e.g., many seconds to minutes to hours)
   total up the number of bytes that have been congestion marked and the
   total number of bytes sent per end-user.  Compute the ratio of
   congested bytes to total bytes.  This measures the average rate per
   user.



mcdysan-iccrg-usecases-00   Expires September 5, 2012          [Page 5]

   Quantizing users into classes using one threshold on total and
   another threshold on ratio results in a grid that identifies four
   classes of user:

                 +------------+-------------+-------------+
                 |            |          Volume           |
                 |   Ratio    |    Large    |    Small    |
                 +------------+-------------+-------------+
                 |   High     | Heavy User  | Bursty User |
                 +------------+-------------+-------------+
                 |    Low     | LEDBAT User | Light User  |
                 +------------+-------------+-------------+
      (Where "LEDBAT User" includes other Less-than-Best-Effort
   algorithms.)

                         Figure 1: Four Classes of User

   Note that Bursty and Heavy Users contribute more to congestion
   marking, but a Bursty user contributes less overall congestion
   marking and may be creating shorter periods of queue filling as
   compared with heavy users.  LEDBAT and light users create less to
   congestion marking, with LEDBAT users able to transfer more volume as
   compared with light users since LEDBAT users back off before
   congestion marking occurs.  An operator might reasonably take this
   into account in their shaping algorithms.

4.2. Feedback on Time of Day, Day of Week Charging

   Congestion occurs when the offered load approaches that of the
   provisioned capacity, which often does not occur until shortly before
   there would be a need to provision additional capacity. Depending
   upon how restoration capacity is allocated by a service/content
   provider, congestion may only occur during peak periods when a
   failure is present.

   Without Conex, utilization averaged over several minutes can be as
   high as 70 to 80% in typical network bottlenecks without loss that
   would reduce TCP effective throughput (i.e., goodput). A short term
   congestion control (sub-second to seconds) method that could increase
   utilization to above 90% and still avoid loss would only increase
   effective capacity by 10-20%.

   If traffic increases at 50-75% per year, then a 10-20% increase in
   effective capacity means that the provisioning interval is only
   shifted by a few months.  This handling of short term congestion use
   case alone may not be sufficient motivation for a service provider to
   deploy congestion handling measures.

   However, in many points of a network, the majority of usage occurs
   during peak periods (e.g, a few busy hours) while much spare capacity
   exists off peak. The product of the spare capacity (bits/second) and



mcdysan-iccrg-usecases-00   Expires September 5, 2012          [Page 6]

   the non-peak interval (seconds) that could carry traffic ranges from
   2 to 10 times of the traffic carried during the peak period.

   Congestion exposure and congestion pricing that enables users and
   content providers to time shift traffic to off-peak periods that
   would have otherwise been sent during peak periods can reduce
   provisioned capacity cost by as much as several hundred percent.

   Historical time of day usage patterns could be employed to time shift
   traffic, but often maintenance actions are performed during the off
   peak periods, making the prediction of congestion using these methods
   less reliable. An automatic method for detection of congestion during
   off-peak periods is highly desirable.

4.3. Recharging for Implementing Congestion Pricing

   There should be a means to recharge (i.e., someone other than the
   receiving user pays) for usage that causes congestion during peak
   demand period versus that which does not [Varian].

   If TCP were augmented with information related to the form of
   congestion, including not only short term as covered in [UseCases],
   but also including usage tier, Time of Day, or burstiness then
   sufficient information to implement sender pays (e.g., Content
   provider)versus receiver pays (e.g., end user) could be implemented.
   When the sender includes this information in the IP layer, then usage
   tier counting and TOD counting could be accounted for differently in
   IP devices in the path between sender and destination. Such an
   indication of recharging would need be to be authenticated in some
   way.

4.4. Usage Tier/ Volume Feedback

   Usage/volume caps may be arranged into multiple tiers with different
   pricing based upon monthly volume. This results in some problems as
   described in the next section. Next, high-level objectives to address
   these issues are then proposed. Then potential ways that already
   defined means [Mechanisms] may be employed are described. Finally, to
   address some of these issues, other measures and mechanisms that
   could possibly better meet the objectives are described.

4.4.1. Objectives for Addressing this Issue

   Provide a way to inform a receiver of the usage/volume incurred to a
   moment in time. Ideally, this would also include the usage/volume
   time period (e.g., a month). This should be accomplished without
   having the user logging in to a portal to retrieve usage information,
   for example, as described in [Feamster11], but should be provided as
   an interface usable (potentially as an API) to any authorized
   application.




mcdysan-iccrg-usecases-00   Expires September 5, 2012          [Page 7]

   Provide a way to inform a receiver of a trend that if usage continues
   at the same rate then a specific usage/volume tier will be crossed.

   Indicate to a receiver whether usage/volume counting is occurring in
   a different way when congestion measure of a particular form (e.g.,
   loss, ECN marking) is occurring.

   Standardize a way to mark packets in a way (e.g., [Lower Effort]) in
   conjunction with some form of conex signaling that indicates
   usage/volume counting will not occur (or are counted separately)
   under the condition that these packets do not create congestion. A
   means to ensure that these marked packets do not create congestion
   and do not impact best (and better) effort marked packets is also
   required.

   Enable a means for recharging to occur, where usage/volume counting
   does not occur for the receiving user since some other party has
   agreed to incur the cost of usage/volume for that flow.

4.4.2. Potential Support Using Abstract Mechanism

   The conex abstract mechanism [Mechanism] defines implicit signaling
   of loss and explicit signaling of ECN marking. It also defines re-
   echoed signal for loss and ECN marking based upon feedback carried by
   TCP from a receiver back to the sender (in an RFC to be developed by
   the conex wg as defined in the charter). If this feedback mechanism
   is designed to be extensible, then a variety of forms of feedback
   could be developed for use in experiments.

   Counting usage/volume differently for congested packets (or congested
   intervals) based upon [Mechanism] re-echoed congestion experienced
   signals seems straightforward. This could be a local matter for the
   IP node which implements usage/volume tier counting.

   Also, counting packets marked as Lower Effort differently is a local
   matter. How to ensure that these packets do not interfere with best
   effort could be implemented by Diffserv methods locally and at other
   potential bottlenecks.

   Since packets subject to counting in a usage/volume cap may not occur
   during congestion intervals, reinsertion of such counting information
   using the re-echoed signals that indicate congestion does not seem
   possible since the same bits cannot represent usage counting and
   congestion experienced.

   What is missing from the current conex mechanism is a feed forward
   path operating over a longer timescale that contains sufficient
   information which can be provided to an individual application to
   meet the stated objectives.





mcdysan-iccrg-usecases-00   Expires September 5, 2012          [Page 8]

4.4.3. Additional Support Using other Measures and Mechanisms

   Usage/volume counting has some aspects similar to that of a
   congestible queue, but on a much longer timescale, as follows:

   o  Instead of a queue which is typically sized for O(10 ms) at the
      sending rate, usage/volume counting occurs on a timescale O(month.

   o  A usage/volume tier is a threshold on a long term usage counter,
      similar to the way ECN marking can be a threshold on in a queue.

   o  Queue loss is similar to a usage/volume counter crossing from one
      tier into the next.

   o  A usage/volume tier trend warning is similar to a rate estimate
      for ECN marking based upon queue fill rate, as is described in
      PCN.

   Therefore, in an abstract way a usage/volume counter can be viewed as
   a congestible resource, but in some ways not the same as a
   congestible queue. If this information is to be fed forward in a way
   observable at the IP layer and fed back at the transport layer (e.g.,
   TCP), then additional packet and transport fields and/or mechanisms
   may be better suited to this purpose.

   Furthermore, instead of feeding forward information in each IPv6
   packet as in [Mechanism], usage/volume congestible resource
   information can occur much less frequently (e.g., many minutes to
   hours). The following is an outline of such measures and mechanisms.

   The basic idea is based on the fact that the sender and receiver need
   to be cooperating using the same experimental extensions to TCP, and
   that if TCP can carry some of the additional information, then the
   scarcity of IPv6 header bits is avoided. Furthermore, as described
   previously, "fast path" processing is not required for this use case
   which has resulted in conex specifying the destination options field
   [conexdestopt]. Instead, the hop-by-options field of the IPv6 header
   could be used [RFC2460], [IPv6Format] which would only require "slow
   path" processing. A mechanism to allow the experimental sender to
   send a "probe" in the IPv6 packet (e.g., using an experimental IPv6
   protocol type) could be used by a intermediate IP node(s) to forward
   the "probe" packet to a special processor (which may be separate from
   the routers' processor). This special processor could use a polled
   version of usage/volume count information per user and could also be
   configured with subscription information (e.g., usage/volume cap
   tier, cap duration), and threshold settings.

   The handling of this "probe" IPv6 packet and associated TCP segment
   needs to be done within the TCP flow. It could use an Out Of Band
   mechanism similar to the urgent data capability in TCP. (For example,
   an experimental usage of the Urgent bit could possibly be employed.)
   The special processor could insert additional measures and implement


mcdysan-iccrg-usecases-00   Expires September 5, 2012          [Page 9]

   some of the proposed mechanisms and then modify/augment the "probe"
   TCP (urgent-like) segment with the requested information and forwards
   this modified "probe" packet toward the receiver via the intermediate
   IP node. Packets from the receiver back to the sender could be sent
   directly, or could be directed through the special processor at
   intermediate node(s), depending upon the specifics of the use case
   involved.

   A consequence of the above extension of measures and mechanisms is
   that the sender and receiver now have much more information which
   could be used to solve the stated problems and meet the objectives.

   The information carried in a "probe" TCP segment could include:

   o  The service being requested, for example:

       o Request information on the users' usage/volume tier

       o Request statistics on usage

       o Request threshold trend report

       o Request not counting this flow since it is lower effort

       o Request recharging

   o  Information that could be provided by the "special processor"
      includes:

       o Duration and cap for the usage volume measurement tier (e.g., a
          month)

       o The absolute count of packets and octets received/sent, and/or
          fraction of the usage tier already used

       o Count of packets and octets received/sent which experienced
          congestion

       o Count of packet and octets received/sent that were marked as
          Lower Effort

       o Estimate of whether the user will exceed the usage tier if the
          historical usage rate to the reporting instant continues

       o A pointer (e.g., URL) and identification of the authentication
          method that would enable other queries, and/or implement
          alternative charging methods (e.g., recharging)

       o Other measures related to the "congestion" of a usage/volume
          tier use case (or possibly other use cases as well).




mcdysan-iccrg-usecases-00   Expires September 5, 2012         [Page 10]

   One example of a different type of measure is described in
   [Stanojevic]. In this paper, the Shapley value [Shapley] is used
   instead of a 95-th percentile measure of hourly usage measurements
   across a month. The Shapley value has the following desirable
   intuitive properties [Shapley]: individual fairness, efficiency,
   symmetry and additivity. Although the 95-th percentile measure is not
   directly related to the usage/volume tier use case, the authors state
   that this is a case they plan to address in future research. A
   mapping, such as an approximation to the Shapley value described in
   this paper, could be a way to compress the usage/volume tier feed
   forward/ feedback information into a smaller number of bits that
   represents the incentives described in the objectives section.

5. Security Considerations

   In the proposed mechanisms there are indications that could be
   spoofed and/or used to game counting and congestion feedback
   mechanisms, and therefore an authentication mechanism may be needed
   when this information is handled at the TCP/IPv6 layer in the sender
   to destination direction or at the TCP layer in the destination to
   sender direction.

6. IANA Considerations

   None

7. Acknowledgements

   The idea of how to use the experimental mechanism being developed by
   the conex working group to address heavy versus light users was
   suggested by Toby Moncaster. The idea of not counting lower effort
   traffic against a usage/volume cap was suggested my Mikael
   Abrahamsson on the conex mailing list. Lars Eggert provided the
   reference to [Stanojevic] on the conex mailing list as an example of
   a different form of congestion measure.

8. References

8.1. Normative References

   [RFC2119] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
             Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

8.2. Informative References

   [UseCases] B. Briscoe, R. Woundy, A. Cooper, "ConEx Concepts and Use
   Cases," draft-conex-concepts-uses-04, Work in Progress

   [Bauer09]  Bauer, S., Clark, D., and W. Lehr, "The Evolution of
   Internet Congestion", 2009.




mcdysan-iccrg-usecases-00   Expires September 5, 2012         [Page 11]

   [Mechanism] M. Mathis, B. Briscoe, "Congestion Exposure (ConEx)
   Concepts and Abstract Mechanism," draft-mathis-conex-abstract-mech-
   00, Work in Progress

   [Varian] Hal Varian, Google, "Congestion pricing principles," IETF 78
   Technical Plenary, 29 July 2010

   [Johari] Ramesh Johari, Stanford University, "The information in
   congestion prices: milliseconds to years," IETF 78 Technical Plenary,
   29 July 2010

   [NewAmerica] Li, Losey, "Bandwidth Caps for Residential High- Speed
   Internet in the U.S. and Japan," August 2009,
   http://www.newamerica.net/files/Bandwidth%20Caps%20for%20High-
   Speed%20Internet%20in%20the%20U.S.%20and%20Japan.pdf

   [LowerEffort] R. Bless, K. Nichols, K. Wehrle, "A Lower Effort Per-
   Domain Behavior (PDB) for Differentiated Services," RFC3662, December
   2003

   [RFC2460]   S. Deering, R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
   (IPv6) Specification," RFC 2460  December 1998

   [IPv6Format] S. Krishnan, M. Kuehlewind, "Conex IPv6 Format," draft-
   krishnan-conex-ipv6

   [conexdestopt] S. Krishnan, M. Kuehlewind, C. Ucendo, "IPv6
   Destination Option for Conex," draft-ietf-conex-destopt, work in
   progress.

   [Feamster11] N. Feamster, "Software Defined Network Management," Open
   Networking Summit, Oct 2011, http://opennetsummit.org/talks/feamster-
   pdf.pdf



   [Stanojevic] Stanojevic, Laoutaris, Rodriguez, Telefonica Research,
   "On Economic Heavy Hitters: Shapley value analysis of 95th-percentile
   pricing," IMC'10, November 1-3, 2010, Melbourne, Australia,
   http://conferences.sigcomm.org/imc/2010/papers/p75.pdf

   [Shapley] Wikipedia, "Shapley value,"
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shapley_value

9. Acknowledgments

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as authors
   of the code. All rights reserved.




mcdysan-iccrg-usecases-00   Expires September 5, 2012         [Page 12]

   THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS
   "AS IS" AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT
   LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR
   A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT
   OWNER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL,
   SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT
   LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
   DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY
   THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT
   (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
   OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

   This code was derived from IETF RFC [insert RFC number]. Please
   reproduce this note if possible.

Authors' Addresses

      Dave McDysan
      Verizon
      Email: dave.mcdysan@verizon.com


































mcdysan-iccrg-usecases-00   Expires September 5, 2012         [Page 13]

