ARMD BOF                                                    L. Dunbar
Internet Draft                                               S. Hares
Intended status: Standard Track                                Huawei
Expires: April 2011                                   Murari Sridharan
                                             Narasimhan Venkataramaiah
                                                            Microsoft
                                                            T Sridhar
                                                             Force 10
                                                      October 18, 2010


         Address Resolution for Large Data Center Problem Statement
                draft-dunbar-armd-problem-statement-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 18, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must



Dunbar                 Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft    AR for cloud DC Problem Statement       October 2010


   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.

Abstract

   Server virtualization enables one physical server to support multiple
   virtual machines (VMs) so that multiple virtual hosts (20, 30, or
   hundreds of) can be running on one physical server. As virtual
   machines are introduced to the data center, the number of hosts
   within one data center can grow dramatically, resulting in
   significant impact on the network.

   This document describes reasons why it is still desirable to have
   virtual machines in the data center to be in one Layer 2 network and
   potential problems this type of Layer 2 network will face. The goal
   is to outline the problem area for the IETF to create a working
   group. This working group will   work on interoperable and scalable
   solutions for data center(s) with large number of virtual machines.

Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 0.

Table of Contents


   1. Introduction................................................3
   2. Terminology.................................................4
   3. Layer 2 Requirements in the Data Center......................4
      3.1. Layer 2 Requirement for VM Migration....................4
      3.2. Layer 2 Requirement for Load Balancing..................4
      3.3. Layer 2 Requirement for Active/Standby VMs..............5
   4. Cloud and Internet Data Centers with Virtualized Servers......5
   5. ARP Issues in the Data Center................................6
   6. ARPs & VM Migration.........................................7
   7. Limitations of VLANs/Smaller Subnets in the Cloud Data Center.8
   8. Why IETF Needs To Develop Solutions Instead of IEEE 802.......8
   9. Conclusion and Recommendation................................8
   10. Manageability Considerations................................8
   11. Security Considerations.....................................8
   12. IANA Considerations.........................................9
   13. Acknowledgments............................................9
   14. References.................................................9
   Authors' Addresses.............................................9


Dunbar                 Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft    AR for cloud DC Problem Statement       October 2010


   Intellectual Property Statement................................10
   Disclaimer of Validity........................................11



1. Introduction

   Server virtualization allows the sharing of the underlying physical
   machine (server) resources among multiple virtual machines, each
   running its own operating system. Server virtualization is the key
   enabler to data center agility, i.e. allowing any server to host any
   application and providing the flexibility of adding, shrinking, or
   moving services within the physical infrastructure. Server
   virtualization is also the key element for Cloud Computing services,
   such as Amazon's EC2 service, and virtual desktop services, which
   allow servers in data center(s) to provide virtual desktops to
   millions of end users.

   Server virtualization provides numerous benefits, including higher
   utilization, increased data security, reduced user downtime, and even
   significant power conservation, along with the promise of a more
   flexible and dynamic computing environment. As a result, many
   organizations are highly motivated to incorporate server
   virtualization technologies into their data centers.

   While server virtualization is an enabler for flexible management of
   server resources, it does impose significant challenges to networks
   which interconnect all the servers in data center(s).

   Consider a typical tree structured Layer 2 network, with one or two
   aggregation switches connected to a group of Top of Rack (ToR)
   switches and each ToR switch connected to a group of physical servers
   (hosts). The number of servers connected in this network is limited
   to the port count of the ToR switches. For example, if a ToR switch
   has 20 downstream ports, there are only 20 servers or hosts connected
   to it. If the aggregation switch has 256 ports connecting to ToR
   switches, there could be up to 20*256=5120 hosts connected to one
   aggregation switch when the servers are not virtualized.

   When Virtual Machines are introduced to servers, one server can
   support hundreds of VMs. Hypothetically, if one server supports up to
   100 VMs, the same ToR switches and Aggregation switch as above would
   need to support up to 512000 hosts. Even if there is enough bandwidth
   on the links to support the traffic volume from all those VMs, other
   issues associated with Layer 2, like frequent ARP broadcast by hosts,
   unknown flooding, create challenges for the network.



Dunbar                 Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft    AR for cloud DC Problem Statement       October 2010


2. Terminology

   Aggregation Switch: A Layer 2 switch interconnecting ToR switches

   Bridge:  IEEE802.1Q compliant device. In this draft, Bridge is used
             interchangeably with Layer 2 switch.

   CUG:     Closed User Group

   DC:      Data Center

   EOR:    End of Row switches in data center.

   FDB:    Filtering Database for Bridge or Layer 2 switch

   ToR:    Top of Rack Switch. It is also known as access switch.

   VM:     Virtual Machines

   VPN:     Virtual Private Network

3. Layer 2 Requirements in the Data Center

3.1. Layer 2 Requirement for VM Migration

   VM migration refers to moving virtual machines from one physical
   server to another. Seamlessly moving VMs within a resource pool is
   the key to achieve efficient server utilization and data center
   agility.

   One of the key requirements for VM migration is the VM maintaining
   the same IP address and MAC address after moving to the new location,
   so that its operation can be continued in the new location. Thus, VMs
   can only be migrated among servers on the same Layer 2 network.

3.2. Layer 2 Requirement for Load Balancing

   One of the most common applications of load balancing is to provide a
   single Internet service from multiple servers, sometimes known as a
   server farm. The load balancer typically sits in-line between the
   client and the hosts that provide the services to the client. For
   applications with relative smaller amount of traffic going into
   servers and relative large amount of traffic from servers, it is
   desirable to allow reply data from servers go directly to clients
   without going through the Load Balancer. In this kind of design,
   called Direct Server Return, it is necessary for Load Balancer and



Dunbar                 Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft    AR for cloud DC Problem Statement       October 2010


   the cluster of hosts to be on same Layer 2 network so that they
   communicate with each other via their MAC addresses.

3.3. Layer 2 Requirement for Active/Standby VMs

   For redundant servers (or VMs) serving same applications, both Active
   and Standby servers (VMs) need to have keep-alive messages between
   them. When the Active server fails/is taken out of service, the
   switch over to the Standby would be transparent if they are on the
   same Layer 2 network.

4. Cloud and Internet Data Centers with Virtualized Servers

   Cloud Computing service, like Amazon's Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon
   EC2) and Virtual Private Cloud (Amazon VPC), allows users (clients)
   to create their own virtual hosts and virtual subnets which are
   housed by VMs in the cloud providers' data center.

   Telecom service providers may also extend their existing VPNs to
   accommodate client VMs that the service provider hosts on its on
   physical servers. This could be realized by client "subnets" in the
   data center.

   These client subnets in the data center could have client specific IP
   addresses, which could lead to possible overlaps in address spaces.
   In this scenario, it is very critical to segregate traffic among
   different client subnets (or VPNs) in data center.

   Cloud/Internet Data Centers have the following special properties:

     Massive number of hosts

     Massive number of client subnets or Closed User Groups co-existing
     in the data center, with each subnet having their own IP addresses

        In the example of Private Cloud VPN (L2VPN or L3VPN) with
        virtual hosts residing in Service Provider data centers, each
        VPN could also include PEs (Provider Edge switch/router) at
        traditional Customer Locations.

     Hosts (VMs) migrate from one location to another

        Physical resource and logical hosts/contents are separated, i.e.
        one user's application could be loaded to any Virtual Machines
        on any servers, and could be migrated to different locations for
        efficient server and storage management.



Dunbar                 Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft    AR for cloud DC Problem Statement       October 2010


        As discussed earlier, this migration requires the VMs to
        maintain the same IP and MAC addresses. The association to their
        corresponding subnet (or VPN) should not change either.

5. ARP Issues in the Data Center

   In a Layer 2 network, hosts can be attached and re-attached at any
   location on the network. IPv4 hosts use ARP (Address Resolution
   Protocol-RFC826) to find the corresponding MAC address of a target
   host. IPv4 ARP is a protocol that uses the Ethernet broadcast service
   for discovering a host's MAC address from its IP address. For host A
   to find the MAC address of a host B on the same subnet with IP
   Address B-IP, host A broadcasts an ARP query packet containing B  as                                                                      IP
   well as its own IP address (A ) on its Ethernet interface. All hosts                                    IP
   in the same subnet receive the packet. Host B, whose IP address is
   B , replies (via unicast) to inform A of its MAC address. A will         IP
   also record the mapping between B  and B-MAC.                                         IP

   Even though all hosts maintain the MAC to target IP address mapping
   locally to avoid repetitive ARP broadcast message for the same target
   IP address, hosts age out their learnt MAC to IP mapping very
   frequently. For Microsoft Windows (Versions XP and Server 2003), the
   default ARP cache policy is to discard entries that have not been
   used in at least two minutes, and for cache entries that are in use,
   to retransmit an ARP request every 10 minutes. So hosts send out ARP
   very frequently.

   In addition to broadcast messages sent from hosts, Layer 2 switches
   also flood received data frames if the destination MAC address is
   unknown. All Layer 2 switches learn the source MAC address of data
   frames which traverse through the switches. Layer 2 switches also age
   out their learnt MAC addresses in order to limit the number of
   entries in their Filtering Database (FDB). When a switch receives a
   packet with an unknown MAC address, it floods this packet to all
   ports which are enabled for the corresponding VLAN.

   The flooding and broadcast have worked well in the past when the
   Layer 2 network is limited to a smaller size. A common scenario is
   for Layer 2 networks to limit the number of hosts to be less then
   200, so that broadcast storms and flooding can be restricted to a
   smaller domain.

   As indicated in Reference [Scaling Ethernet], Carnegie Mellon did a
   study on the number of ARP queries received at a workstation on CMU's
   School of Computer Science LAN over a 12 hour period on August 9,
   2004. At peak, the host received 1150 ARPs per second, and on
   average, the host received 89 ARPs per second. During the data


Dunbar                 Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft    AR for cloud DC Problem Statement       October 2010


   collection, 2,456 hosts were observed sending ARP queries. The report
   expects that the amount of ARP traffic will scale linearly with the
   number of hosts on the LAN. For 1 million hosts, it is expected to
   have 468,240 ARPs per second or 239 Mbps of ARP traffic at peak,
   which is more than enough to overwhelm a standard 100 Mbps LAN
   connection. Ignoring the link capacity, forcing servers to handle an
   extra half million packets per second to inspect each ARP packet
   would impose a prohibitive computational burden.

6. ARPs & VM Migration

   In general, there are more flooding and more ARP messages when VMs
   migrate.VM migration in Layer 2 environments will require updating
   the Layer 2 (MAC) FDB in the individual switches in the data center
   to ensure accurate forwarding. Consider a case where a VM migrates
   across racks.  The migrated VM often sends out a gratuitous ARP
   broadcast when it comes up at the new location. This is flooded by
   the TOR switch at the new rack to the entire network. The TOR at the
   old rack is not aware of the migration until it receives this
   gratuitous ARP. So it continues to forward frames to the port where
   it learnt the VM's MAC address from before, leading to black holing
   of traffic.  The duration of this black holing period may depend upon
   the topology. It may be longer if the VM has moved to a rack in a
   different data center connected to this data center over Layer 2.

   During transition periods, some hosts might be temporarily taken out
   of service. Then, there will be lots of ARP request broadcast
   messages repetitively transmitted from hosts to those temporarily out
   of service hosts. Since there is no response from those target hosts,
   switches do not learn their path, which will cause ARP messages from
   various hosts being flooded across the network.

   In order to segregate traffic among tens of thousands of subnets (or
   Closed User Groups) within a data center, simple VLAN partitioning is
   no longer enough. Some types of encapsulation have to be used, like
   MAC-in-MAC, to further isolate the traffic belonging to different
   subnets. When encapsulation is performed by TOR and VMs move, there
   are a lot more broadcast messages and data frames being flooded in
   the network due to new TOR not knowing the destination address in the
   outer header of the encapsulation.

   Therefore, it is very critical to have some types of ARP optimization
   or extended ARP reply for TOR switches, which perform the
   encapsulation. This can involve knowledge of the target TOR address,
   so that the amount of flooding among TOR switches due to unknown
   destination can be dramatically reduced.



Dunbar                 Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft    AR for cloud DC Problem Statement       October 2010




7. Limitations of VLANs/Smaller Subnets in the Cloud Data Center

   Cloud data centers might need to support more subnets or VLANs than
   4095. So, simple VLAN partitioning is no longer enough to segregate
   traffic among all those subnets. To enforce traffic segregation among
   all those subnets, some types of encapsulation have to be
   implemented.

   As the result of continuous VM migration, hosts in one subnet (VLAN)
   may start with being close together and gradually being relocated to
   various places.

   When one physical server is supporting more than 100 Virtual
   Machines, i.e. >100 hosts, it may start with serving hosts belonging
   to smaller number of VLANs. But gradually, as VM migration proceeds,
   hosts belonging to different VLANs may end up being loaded to VMs on
   this server. Consider a case when there are 50 subnets (VLANs)
   enabled on the switch port to the server, the server has to handle
   all the ARP broadcast messages on all 50 subnets (VLANs). The amount
   of ARP to be processed by each server is still too much.

8. Why IETF Needs To Develop Solutions Instead of IEEE 802

   ARP involves IP to MAC mapping, which traditionally has been
   standardized by IETF, e.g. RFC826.

9. Conclusion and Recommendation

    When there are tens of thousands of VMs in one Data Center or
    multiple data centers interconnected to form a large Layer 2 network,
    Address Resolution process, has to be enhanced to support large
    scale data center and service agility

    Therefore, we recommend IETF to create a working group to develop
    interoperable solutions for Address Resolution for Massive amount of
    hosts in Data Center (ARMD).

10. Manageability Considerations

   This document does not add additional manageability considerations.

11. Security Considerations

   This document has no additional requirement for security.



Dunbar                 Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft    AR for cloud DC Problem Statement       October 2010


12. IANA Considerations



13. Acknowledgments

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.

14. References

   [ARP]   D.C. Plummer, "An Ethernet address resolution protocol."
             RFC826, Nov 1982.

   [Microsoft Windows] "Microsoft Windows Server 2003 TCP/IP
             implementation details."
             http://www.microsoft.com/technet/prodtechnol/windowsserver2
             003/technologies/networking/tcpip03.mspx, June 2003.

   [Scaling Ethernet] Myers, et. al., " Rethinking the Service Model:
             Scaling Ethernet to a Million Nodes", Carnegie Mellon
             University and Rice University

   [Cost of a Cloud] Greenberg, et. al., "The Cost of a Cloud: Research
             Problems in Data Center Networks"

   [Gratuitous ARP] S. Cheshire, "IPv4 Address Conflict Detection", RFC
             5227, July 2008.










Authors' Addresses

   Linda Dunbar
   Huawei Technologies
   1700 Alma Drive, Suite 500
   Plano, TX 75075, USA
   Phone: (972) 543 5849
   Email: ldunbar@huawei.com




Dunbar                 Expires April 18, 2011                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft    AR for cloud DC Problem Statement       October 2010


   Sue Hares
   Huawei Technologies
   2330 Central Expressway,
   Santa Clara, CA 95050, USA
   Phone:
   Email: shares@huawei.com

   Narasimhan Venkataramaiah
   Microsoft Corporation
   One Microsoft Way
   Redmond, WA  98052-6399 USA
   Phone : 425-707-4328
   Email : narave@microsoft.com

   T Sridhar
   Force 10 Networks
   350 Holger Way,
   San Jose, CA 95134, USA
   Phone:
   Email: tsridhar@force10networks.com

Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF Trust takes no position regarding the validity or scope of
   any Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be
   claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology
   described in any IETF Document or the extent to which any license
   under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it
   represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any
   such rights.

   Copies of Intellectual Property disclosures made to the IETF
   Secretariat and any assurances of licenses to be made available, or
   the result of an attempt made to obtain a general license or
   permission for the use of such proprietary rights by implementers or
   users of this specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR
   repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   any standard or specification contained in an IETF Document. Please
   address the information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org.


Dunbar                 Expires April 18, 2011                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft    AR for cloud DC Problem Statement       October 2010


Disclaimer of Validity

   All IETF Documents and the information contained therein are provided
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION THEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.

































Dunbar                 Expires April 18, 2011                [Page 11]

