TRILL working group                                         L. Dunbar
Internet Draft                                                 Huawei
Intended status: Standard Track
Expires: Sept 2011
                                                         March 7, 2011


                   Directory Server Assisted TRILL edge
              draft-dunbar-trill-server-assisted-edge-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 7, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.




Dunbar                Expires September 7, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft  Directory Server Assisted TRILL edge        March 2011


Abstract

   TRILL edge nodes currently learn the mapping between MAC address and
   its corresponding TRILL edge node address by observing the data
   packets traversed through.

   This document describes why and how directory based server(s) can
   optimize TRILL network in data center environment.

Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 0.

Table of Contents


   1. Introduction ................................................ 2
   2. Terminology ................................................. 3
   3. Impact to TRILL by massive number of hosts ................... 3
   4. Directory Server for TRILL in Data Center environment.                                                                ........ 4
   5. Conclusion and Recommendation                                        ................................ 5
   6. Manageability Considerations                                       ................................. 5
   7. Security Considerations                                  ...................................... 5
   8. IANA Considerations ......................................... 5
   9. Acknowledgments ............................................. 5
   10. References ................................................. 5
   Authors' Addresses ............................................. 6
   Intellectual Property Statement                                       ................................. 6
   Disclaimer of Validity ......................................... 6



1. Introduction

   Data center networks are different from campus networks in several
   ways. Main differences include:
        VM (host) to server assignment is done by Server (or VM)
        Manager, which means that the host location is arranged by
        management system(s).
        Topology is based on racks and rows;
        There could be massive number of virtual machines (hosts), but
        relatively small number of switches.


Dunbar                  Expires Sept7, 2011                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft  Directory Server Assisted TRILL edge        March 2011


   This draft describes why Data Center TRILL networks can be optimized
   by utilizing directory server based approach.
2. Terminology

   Bridge:  IEEE802.1Q compliant device. In this draft, Bridge is used
             interchangeably with Layer 2 switch.

   DC:      Data Center

   EOR:    End of Row switches in data center.

   FDB:    Filtering Database for Bridge or Layer 2 switch

   ToR:    Top of Rack Switch. It is also known as access switch.

   VM:     Virtual Machines

3. Impact to TRILL by massive number of hosts

   In a virtualized data center, a VM may be placed on any physical
   server. A variety of algorithms can be applied to select the location
   of a VM. Resource aware algorithms (e.g. energy, bandwidth, etc,)
   will use a placement that satisfies the processing requirements of
   each VM but require the minimal number of physical servers and
   switching devices.
   With this, and similar types of assignment algorithm, subnets tend to
   extend throughout the network.  When this happens, the broadcast
   messages within each subnet will be flooded across the TRILL domain,
   which not only consumes a lot of bandwidth on links in TRILL domain,
   but also causes a TRILL edge port to learn all the hosts belonging to
   all the subnets which are enabled on the port. Even though a TRILL
   edge port is only supposed to learn the entries which communicate
   with hosts underneath, the frequent ARP/ND from all hosts within each
   subnet will always refresh the TRILL edge node's MAC<->TRILL-Edge
   mapping table.
   Consider a data center with 80 rows, 8 racks per row and 40 servers
   per rack.  There can be 80*8*40=25600 servers. Suppose each server is
   virtualized to 20 VMs, there could be 25600*20=512000 hosts in this
   data center.
   Let's consider a case that the TRILL edge starts at an Ingress port
   of a TOR switch. Assuming there are 5 different VLANs enabled on the
   TRILL Ingress port (i.e. the 20 VMs in one server belong to 5
   different VLANs) and each VLAN has 200 hosts, then the TRILL edge


Dunbar                  Expires Sept7, 2011                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft  Directory Server Assisted TRILL edge        March 2011


   port has to learn 5*200=1000 MAC&VLAN entries. Since there are 40
   ports on the TOR, the total number of MAC&VLAN entries for the TOR
   switch is 1000*40= 40000. Under this scenario, there will be 25600
   entries in the TRILL routing domain if protection is not considered.
   When protection is considered, the number of ports in TRILL domain
   will double. That may be too many nodes for the IS/IS routing domain.
   Let's consider another case of TRILL edge starting at the End of Row
   switches. With the same assumption as before, there are 40*20 = 800
   hosts to attached to each port of an EoR switch and 8*800=6400 hosts
   attached to an EoR switch. If all those 6400 hosts belong to 640
   VLANs and each VLAN has 200 hosts, then the total number of MAC&VLAN
   entries to be learned by the TRILL edge (i.e. EoR) = 640*200=128000.
   Under this scenario, there will be 80*8 = 640 EoR ports in the TRILL
   routing domain when protection is not considered and 1280 EoR ports
   when protection is considered. However, the number of MAC&VLAN
   entries to be learnt by the TRILL edge node is very large.

4. Directory Server for TRILL in Data Center environment.

   As described in the Section 1, the VM placement to server/rack is
   orchestrated by Server (or VM) Management System(s). Therefore, there
   is a central location with the information on where each VM is
   placed. So it is relatively reliable to build a centralized (or
   distributed) directory server(s) who has the knowledge on where each
   VM is placed.

   Here can be a procedure for TRILL edge node to utilize a Directory
   Server

        TRILL edge node can simply intercept all ARP requests and
        forward them to the Directory Server,

        The reply from the Directory Server can be the standard ARP
        reply with an extra field showing the TRILL egress node address

        TRILL ingress node can cache the mapping

        If TRILL edge node receives an unknown MAC-DA, it simply
        forwards the packet to the directory server. The directory
        server can simply drop the frame if it doesn't have the
        information, or forward the frame to the correct egress node and
        send down a new mapping to the ingress Trill edge node.





Dunbar                  Expires Sept7, 2011                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft  Directory Server Assisted TRILL edge        March 2011


   Another approach is for Directory Server to pass down the MAC&VLAN
   mapping for all the hosts belonging to all the VLANs enabled on the
   TRILL edge port.

5. Conclusion and Recommendation

    The traditional TRILL learning approach of observing data plane can
    no longer keep pace with the ever growing number of hosts in Data
    center.

    Therefore, we suggest TRILL to consider directory assisted
    approach(es). This draft only introduces the basic concept of using
    directory assisted approach for TRILL edge nodes to learn the MAC to
    TRILL mapping. We want to get some working group consensus before
    drilling down to detailed steps required for the approach.

6. Manageability Considerations

   This document does not add additional manageability considerations.

7. Security Considerations

   This document has no additional requirement for security.

8. IANA Considerations



9. Acknowledgments

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.

10. References

   [ARMD-Problem] Dunbar, et,al, "Address Resolution for Large Data
             Center Problem Statement", Oct 2010.

   [ARP reduction] Shah, et. al., "ARP Broadcast Reduction for Large Data
             Centers", Oct 2010










Dunbar                  Expires Sept7, 2011                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft  Directory Server Assisted TRILL edge        March 2011



Authors' Addresses

   Linda Dunbar
   Huawei Technologies
   1700 Alma Drive, Suite 500
   Plano, TX 75075, USA
   Phone: (972) 543 5849
   Email: ldunbar@huawei.com



Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF Trust takes no position regarding the validity or scope of
   any Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be
   claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology
   described in any IETF Document or the extent to which any license
   under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it
   represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any
   such rights.

   Copies of Intellectual Property disclosures made to the IETF
   Secretariat and any assurances of licenses to be made available, or
   the result of an attempt made to obtain a general license or
   permission for the use of such proprietary rights by implementers or
   users of this specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR
   repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   any standard or specification contained in an IETF Document. Please
   address the information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Disclaimer of Validity

   All IETF Documents and the information contained therein are provided
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION THEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.




Dunbar                  Expires Sept7, 2011                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft  Directory Server Assisted TRILL edge        March 2011


Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.












































Dunbar                  Expires Sept7, 2011                  [Page 7]

