TRILL working group                                         L. Dunbar
Internet Draft                                            D. Eastlake
Intended status: Standard Track                                Huawei
Expires: Sept 2012                                       Radia Perlman
                                                                Intel
                                                          I. Gashinsky
                                                                Yahoo
                                                         July 11, 2011


                      Directory Assisted RBridge edge
             draft-dunbar-trill-directory-assisted-edge-01.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with
   the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
   at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as
   reference material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 11, 2009.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
   respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in



Dunbar                Expires January 11, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft     Directory Assisted RBridge edge          March 2011


   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without
   warranty as described in the BSD License.

Abstract

   RBridge edge nodes currently learn the mapping between MAC address
   and its corresponding RBridge edge node address by observing the
   data packets traversed through.

   This document describes why and how directory assisted RBridge edge
   nodes can improve TRILL network scalability in data center
   environment.

Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 0.

Table of Contents


   1. Introduction ................................................ 3
   2. Terminology ................................................. 3
   3. Impact to RBridge Network by massive number of hosts in Data
   Center(s) ...................................................... 3
   4. Directory Assisted RBridge Edge in Data Center................5
   5. Further optimization in using directory assistance........... 7
      5.1. TRILL Header encapsulated by non-RBridge nodes.......... 9
   6. Conclusion and Recommendation............................... 10
   7. Manageability Considerations................................ 10
   8. Security Considerations..................................... 10
   9. IANA Considerations ........................................ 10
   10. Acknowledgments ........................................... 11
   11. References ................................................ 11
   Authors' Addresses ............................................ 11
   Intellectual Property Statement................................ 12
   Disclaimer of Validity ........................................ 13









Dunbar                  Expires Sept11, 2012                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft     Directory Assisted RBridge edge          March 2011


1. Introduction

   Data center networks are different from campus networks in several
   ways. Main differences include:

      o Data centers, especially Internet or cloud data centers with
         virtualized servers, tend to have large number of hosts
      o Topology is based on racks, rows.
           -  Hosts assignment to Servers, Racks, and Rows is
              orchestrated by Server/VM Management system, not random.
      o With virtualization, there is an ever increasing trend to
         dynamically create VMs when the application requires more
         resources, and move VMs, either from overloaded servers, or to
         aggregate VMs onto fewer servers to save power when demand is
         light. This may lead to hosts belonging to same subnet being
         placed under different locations (racks or rows).

   This draft describes why and how Data Center TRILL networks can be
   optimized by utilizing directory assisted approach.

2. Terminology

   AF      Appointed Forwarder RBridge port

   Bridge:  IEEE802.1Q compliant device. In this draft, Bridge is used
             interchangeably with Layer 2 switch.

   DC:      Data Center

   EoR:    End of Row switches in data center. Also known as
             Aggregation switches in some data centers

   FDB:    Filtering Database for Bridge or Layer 2 switch

   ToR:    Top of Rack Switch in data center. It is also known as
             access switches in some data centers.

   VM:     Virtual Machines

3. Impact to RBridge Network by massive number of hosts in Data
   Center(s)

   In a data center, there are likely to be very large number of hosts
   (e.g. hundreds of thousands, or even more) and hosts belonging to
   one subnet may be placed under different racks or rows. If TRILL is
   deployed in those data centers, hosts belonging to one subnet may be


Dunbar                  Expires Sept11, 2012                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft     Directory Assisted RBridge edge          March 2011


   placed under multiple edge RBridges which are on different Bridged
   LAN. And each edge RBridge needs to enable multiple VLANs. This
   creates several problems which this draft is intending to address:

       - Unnecessary filling of slots in MAC table of edge RBridges, due
        to an edge RBridge, R1 receiving broadcast traffic (ARP/ND
        queries or gratuitous APRs) from hosts that are not actually
        communicating with any hosts attached to R1.
       - The current TRILL protocol requires a MAC address to only be
        accessible from one RBridge edge port (AF port). When a data
        center has dual uplinks for each rack of servers to two
        different Access switches (which is very common),  some links
        can't be fully utilized.
       - Flooding within RBridge domain triggered by ARP/ND.


   Consider a data center with 80 rows, 8 racks per row and 40 servers
   per rack.  There can be 80*8*40=25600 servers. Suppose each server
   is virtualized to 20 VMs, there could be 25600*20=512000 hosts in
   this data center. A common network design for this kind of data
   centers is to have multiple tiers of switches, e.g. one or two
   Access Switches for each rack (ToR), Aggregation switches for each
   row (or EoR), and some Core switches to interconnect the Aggregation
   switches.

   If TRILL is to be deployed in this data center, let's  consider
   following two scenarios of TRILL domain boundary:

        - Scenario #1: TRILL domain boundary are Access (TOR) switches,
         i.e. ToR being the edge RBridges:

         With 80 rows and 8 racks per row, there will be 80*8 = 640 edge
         RBridges, with each Edge RBridge supporting 40 RBridge edge
         ports (facing the servers) and 8 RBridge trunk ports facing
         aggregation (EoR) switches. Then there are 40*640 = 25600
         RBridge edge ports in this data center.

         If each rack and row has two redundant switches, then there
         will be 640*2=1280 RBridge edge nodes and 80*2=160 RBridge core
         nodes. Total number of nodes in this RBridge domain could be
         1440 (1280+160) plus some core switches which interconnect all
         the aggregation (EoR) switches   very large number of nodes in
         this RBridge IS/IS domain.



Dunbar                  Expires Sept11, 2012                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft     Directory Assisted RBridge edge          March 2011


        - Scenario #2: TRILL domain boundary are the aggregation (EoR)
         switches:

         With the same assumption as before, there will be 80 Edge
         RBridges in the RBridge IS/IS domain. Even with redundancy, the
         number of nodes in RBridge domain will be less than 200.
         Therefore, the size of the RBridge IS/IS domain is reasonable.

         But, this scenario creates a Bridged LAN attached to RBridge
         edge ports. It becomes necessary to designate only one port (AF
         port) to forward native traffic to avoid loops among multiple
         RBridge edge ports and to have some mechanisms to prevent loops
         within the Bridged LAN attached to RBridge edge ports.
         Designating one AF port for forwarding native traffic not only
         makes some links unusable but also put extra heavy load on the
         AF port. In addition, when AF changes, traffic temporarily goes
         to black hole. Running traditional Layer 2 STP/RSTP on the
         Bridged LAN for loop prevention may be overkill because the
         topology among the ToR switches and RBridge edge is very
         simple. This draft proposes a simple directory assisted
         approach to avoid loops.

         In addition, the number of MAC&VLAN<->RBridge Edge Mappings to
         be learned and managed by RBridge edge node can be very large.
         In the example above, each Edge RBridge has 8 RBridge edge
         ports facing the ToR switches. Since each ToR has 40 downstream
         ports facing servers and each server has 20 VMs, there are
         40*20 = 800 hosts attached to each downstream port of an EoR
         switch and total of 8*800=6400 hosts attached to this EoR
         switch. If all those 6400 hosts belong to 640 VLANs and each
         VLAN has 200 hosts, then, under the worst case scenario, the
         total number of MAC&VLAN entries to be learned by the RBridge
         edge (i.e. EoR) can be 640*200=128000. You can easily see that
         the number of MAC&VLAN<->RBridge Edge mapping entries to be
         learnt by the RBridge edge node can be very large.

4. Directory Assisted RBridge Edge in Data Center environment

   In data center environment, the hosts (VMs) placement to servers,
   racks, and rows is orchestrated by Server (or VM) Management
   System(s), i.e. there is a database or multiple ones (distributed
   model) which have the knowledge of where each host (VM) is placed.
   If RBridge edge nodes can utilize the information of where each host
   is located, then the flooding process to learn the mapping between
   MAC&VLAN and corresponding RBridge Edge node can be eliminated. This
   is a great optimization, especially in virtualized data center


Dunbar                  Expires Sept11, 2012                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft     Directory Assisted RBridge edge          March 2011


   environment where VMs migrate all the time. If migrated VMs send out
   gratuitous ARP (IPv4) or Unsolicited Neighbor Advertisement (IPv6)
   from the new location, those gratuitous broadcast messages have to
   flood to all other RBridge edge nodes. If migrated VMs don't send
   out gratuitous ARP (or ND) from the new location, for packets
   towards those migrated VMs the ingress RBridge edge nodes will send
   them to the wrong egress RBridge edge nodes, which is also waste of
   bandwidth.

   The benefits of using directory assistance include:

       - The Directory enforced MAC&VLAN <-> RBridge Edge mapping table
         can determine if a frame needs to be forwarded across RBridge
         domain.
           o When multiple Rbridge edge ports are accessible from a
              server (hosts/VMs), a directory assisted RBridge edge
              won't flood frames with an unknown DA to all to other
              RBridge ports. Therefore, there is no need to designate an
              Appointed Forwarder among all the RBridge Edge ports
              connected to a Bridge LAN, which enables all RBridge
              ingress ports to forward traffic.
       - Directory assisted approach can not only eliminate the flooding
         within RBridge domain (unknown learning), but also reduce the
         flooding on the bridged LAN attached to RBridge edge ports.
       - Reduce the amount of MAC&VLAN <-> RBridge edge mapping
         maintained by RBridge edge. No need for an RBridge edge to keep
         the MAC entries for hosts which don't communicate with hosts
         attached to an RBridge edge.


   There can be two different models for RBridge edge node to be
   assisted by Directory:

       - Push Model:

         Directory Server(s) push down the MAC&VLAN <-> RBridge Edge
         mapping for all the hosts which might communicate with hosts
         attached to RBridge edge node.

         [Editor's note: there are multiple ways to narrow down the
         smallest set of remote hosts which communicate with hosts
         attached to an RBridge edge. A very simple approach: For VLAN
         #i enabled on one of RBridge Edge port(s), MAC entries for
         hosts in VLAN #i will not be pushed down to RBridge Edge if


Dunbar                  Expires Sept11, 2012                  [Page 6]

Internet-Draft     Directory Assisted RBridge edge          March 2011


         there is no hosts belonging to VLAN #i attached to the RBridge
         edge. Detailed approaches will be described in a separate
         draft.]

         Whenever there is any change in MAC&VLAN <-> RBridge Edge
         mapping, which can be triggered by hosts being moved, de-
         commissioned, or temporarily out of service due to
         maintenance, an incremental update can be sent to the RBridge
         edge nodes which are impacted by the change.

         Under this model, it is recommended for RBridge edge node to
         simply drop the data frame (instead of flooding to RBridge
         domain) if the destination address can't be found in the
         MAC&VLAN<->RBridge Edge mapping table.

       - Pull model:

         Under this model, RBridge edge node can simply intercept all
         ARP requests and forward them to the Directory Server(s) which
         has the information of how each MAC&VLAN is mapped to its
         corresponding RBridge edge node.

         The reply from the Directory Server can be the standard ARP
         reply with an extra field showing the RBridge egress node
         address

         RBridge ingress node can cache the mapping

         If RBridge edge node receives an unknown MAC-DA, it could
         choose drop the data frame as in the Push Model, or it can
         query the directory server. If there is no response from the
         directory server, the RBridge edge node can drop the frame.

5. Further optimization in using directory assistance for RBridge in
   data center

   The topology between aggregation (or EoR) switches and access (or
   ToR) switches can be very simple in data center environment. Under
   those simple topology environments, having the ToR switches
   participating in RBridge's IS/IS routing domain does not provide
   much value in topology discovery. By eliminating ToR switches from
   RBridge routing domain (i.e. let the aggregation (EoR) switches be
   the boundary of RBridge domain), the number of nodes in the RBridge
   routing domain can be greatly reduced, which in turns can make the
   network scale better.




Dunbar                  Expires Sept11, 2012                  [Page 7]

Internet-Draft     Directory Assisted RBridge edge          March 2011


   However, two new problems are introduced by letting the aggregation
   (EoR) switches be the RBridge Domain boundary in the data center
   environment:

      - the number of MAC&VLAN<->RBridge Edge mapping entries to be
        maintained by the RBridge edge node can be very large (See
        Scenario #2 in Section 3)

      - there is a bridged LAN with multiple ToR switches attached to
        RBridge Edge port(s), it becomes necessary to have some
        mechanisms to prevent loops.

   The Directory Assistance introduced in this draft (Section 4)
   provides a solution to the second problem above, i.e. avoid loops
   among RBridge Edge ports connected to one Bridged LAN so that all
   RBridge edge ports connected by a Bridged LAN can forward native
   traffic. However, there is still the problem of too large table of
   MAC&VLAN <-> RBridge Egress mapping on the edge RBridges.

   Therefore, we are proposing further optimization:

      - for native Ethernet frames to traverse the RBridge domain, the
        TRILL encapsulation is done on a node before entering the
        RBridge domain (e.g. by ToR switches or virtual switch on
        server), instead of the RBridge Ingress edge node (e.g. EoR
        switches). That means that the edge ports of the RBridge
        Ingress node could receive both TRILL-encapsulated data frames
        and native Ethernet frames.   [RBridge] Section 4.6.2 Bullet 8
        specifies that an RBridge port can be configured to accept both
        TRILL encapsulated frames from a neighbor that is not an
        RBridge.

        When data frames do not need to traverse RBridge domain,
        RBridge ingress edge node does its normal native Ethernet data
        frame processing.

      - For egress direction on RBridge edge node, the processing is
        exactly same as regular RBridge edge node, i.e. decapsulates
        the TRILL header of the received TRILL frames and forward the
        decapsulated Ethernet frames to hosts attached to its edge
        ports.

       We call a switch which only performs the necessary TRILL
        encapsulation for Ethernet data frames to traverse the RBridge
        domain a ''TRILL Encapsulating node'' or ''Simplified RBridge''.



Dunbar                  Expires Sept11, 2012                  [Page 8]

Internet-Draft     Directory Assisted RBridge edge          March 2011


        The TRILL Encapsulating Node gets the MAC&VLAN<->RBridge Edge
        mapping table pushed down or pulled from directory servers.
        Upon receiving a native Ethernet frame, the TRILL Encapsulating
        node checks the MAC&VLAN<->RBridge Edge mapping table, and
        perform the corresponding TRILL encapsulation if the entry is
        found in the mapping table. If the destination address of the
        received Ethernet frame and its VLAN doesn't exist in the
        mapping table, the Ethernet frame is forwarded based on normal
        Ethernet switching function.

       +---------------+
       |Outer Ether hd |
       |---------------|
       |TRILL Header   |
       |---------------|      ^
       | MAC-400       |      |
       |---------------|   Inner Ether Header
       | MAC-1         |      |
       |---------------|      V
       |               |
       |---------------|
       |  Payload      |
       |---------------|
       | Ethernet FCS  |
       +---------------+
               ^
               |      +-------+  TRILL    +------+
               |      |  R1   |-----------|  R2  |  Decapsulate TRILL
               |      +---+---+  domain   +------+  header
               |          |                   |
               +----------|                   |
                          |                   |
                       +-----+             +-----+
      Non-RBridge node:|T12  |             | T22 |
      Encapsulate TRILL+-----+             +-----+
      Header for data
      Frames to traverse
      TRILL domain.



 5.1. TRILL Header encapsulated by non-RBridge nodes

   TRILL header includes Source RBridge's nickname and Destination
   RBridge's nickname. When a TRILL header is added by a non-RBridge
   node, using the Ingress RBridge edge node's nickname in the source
   address field will make the ingress RBridge node receive TRILL


Dunbar                  Expires Sept11, 2012                  [Page 9]

Internet-Draft     Directory Assisted RBridge edge          March 2011


   frames with its own nickname in the frames' source address field
   which can be confusing.

   To avoid confusion of Edge RBridges receiving TRILL encapsulated
   frames with its own nickname in the frames' source address field
   from neighboring non-RBridge nodes, a new nickname is given to an
   RBridge edge node, which can be called Phantom Nickname, to
   represent all the TRILL encapsulating nodes attached to the edge
   ports of the RBridge edge node.

   When the Phantom Nickname is used in the Source Address field of a
   TRILL frame, it is understood that the TRILL encapsulation is
   actually done by a non-RBridge node which is attached to an edge
   port of an RBridge Ingress node.

   [Editor's note: a separate draft will be submitted to describe the
   comprehensive behavior of the ''simplified RBridge'' node]



6. Conclusion and Recommendation

    The traditional RBridge learning approach of observing data plane
    can no longer keep pace with the ever growing number of hosts in
    Data center.

    Therefore, we suggest TRILL to consider directory assisted
    approach(es). This draft only introduces the basic concept of using
    directory assisted approach for RBridge edge nodes to learn the
    MAC&VLAN to RBridge Edge mapping. We want to get some working group
    consensus before drilling down to detailed steps required for the
    approach.

7. Manageability Considerations

   This document does not add additional manageability considerations.

8. Security Considerations

   TBD.

9. IANA Considerations

   TBD





Dunbar                  Expires Sept11, 2012                 [Page 10]

Internet-Draft     Directory Assisted RBridge edge          March 2011


10. Acknowledgments

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.

11. References

   [RBridges] Perlman, et, al ''RBridge: Base Protocol Specification'',
   <draft-ietf-trill-rbridge-protocol-16.txt>, March, 2010


   [RBridges-AF]   Perlman, et, al ''RBridges: Appointed Forwarders'',
   <draft-ietf-trill-rbridge-af-02.txt>, April 2011



   [ARMD-Problem] Dunbar, et,al, ''Address Resolution for Large Data
             Center Problem Statement'', Oct 2010.

   [ARP reduction] Shah, et. al., "ARP Broadcast Reduction for Large Data
             Centers", Oct 2010










Authors' Addresses

   Linda Dunbar
   Huawei Technologies
   1700 Alma Drive, Suite 500
   Plano, TX 75075, USA
   Phone: (972) 543 5849
   Email: ldunbar@huawei.com










Dunbar                  Expires Sept11, 2012                 [Page 11]

Internet-Draft     Directory Assisted RBridge edge          March 2011



   Donald Eastlake
   Huawei Technologies
   155 Beaver Street
   Milford, MA 01757 USA
   Phone: 1-508-333-2270
   Email: d3e3e3@gmail.com

   Radia Perlman
   Intel Labs
   2200 Mission College Blvd.
   Santa Clara, CA 95054-1549 USA
   Phone: +1-408-765-8080
   Email: Radia@alum.mit.edu


   Igor Gashinsky
   Yahoo
   45 West 18th Street 6th floor
   New York, NY 10011
   Email: igor@yahoo-inc.com


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF Trust takes no position regarding the validity or scope of
   any Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be
   claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology
   described in any IETF Document or the extent to which any license
   under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it
   represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any
   such rights.

   Copies of Intellectual Property disclosures made to the IETF
   Secretariat and any assurances of licenses to be made available, or
   the result of an attempt made to obtain a general license or
   permission for the use of such proprietary rights by implementers or
   users of this specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line
   IPR repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   any standard or specification contained in an IETF Document. Please
   address the information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org.




Dunbar                  Expires Sept11, 2012                 [Page 12]

Internet-Draft     Directory Assisted RBridge edge          March 2011


Disclaimer of Validity

   All IETF Documents and the information contained therein are
   provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION
   HE/SHE REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY,
   THE IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION THEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.

































Dunbar                  Expires Sept11, 2012                 [Page 13]

