VPN4DC                                                      L. Dunbar
Internet Draft                                                 Huawei
Intended status: Information Track                               N. So
Expires: April 2012                                           Verizon
                                                      October 24, 2011


                         VPN4DC Problem Statement
               draft-dunbar-vpn4dc-problem-statement-00.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 24, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.




So                     Expires April 24, 2012                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      Problem statement for VPN4DC            2011-10-05


Abstract

   VPN4DC is for extending an existing VPN to connect hosts in public
   data center(s) which are purchased or leased by VPN client. This
   draft describes the issues and problems associated with this kind of
   services.

Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC-2119 0.

Table of Contents


   1. Introduction ................................................ 2
   2. Terminology ................................................. 3
   3. Connecting hosts in public Data Centers with a VPN .......... 4
   4. Hosts connectivity for VPN Oriented Data Center Service...... 4
   5. APIs between VPN PEs and Data Center Gateways ............... 6
      5.1. What to be communicated between VPN PEs and Data Center
      Gateways? ................................................... 6
   6. Conclusion and Recommendation................................ 7
   7. Manageability Considerations................................. 7
   8. Security Considerations...................................... 7
   9. IANA Considerations ......................................... 8
   10. Acknowledgments ............................................ 8
   11. References ................................................. 8
   Authors' Addresses ............................................. 8
   Intellectual Property Statement................................. 8
   Disclaimer of Validity ......................................... 9



1. Introduction

   VPN4DC lets VPN clients to connect to their leased or purchased
   computing resources in public data centers via their own VPNs. In
   another words, VPN4DC is elastic which allows a VPN to extend its
   connectivity to (or shrink its connectivity from) resources in one or
   multiple public data centers.

   This kind of service is attractive to VPN customers who often do not
   want to use public Internet to access purchased or leased resources
   in public data centers.


Dunbar                 Expires April 24, 2012                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      Problem statement for VPN4DC            2011-10-05


   For ease of description, this problem statement focuses on making
   today's L3VPN to seamlessly extend to client's hosts in public data
   centers.



2. Terminology

   Aggregation Switch: A Layer 2 switch interconnecting ToR switches

   Bridge:  IEEE802.1Q compliant device. In this draft, Bridge is used
             interchangeably with Layer 2 switch.

   DC:      Data Center

   DA:     Destination Address

   EOR:    End of Row switches in data center.

   FDB:    Filtering Database for Bridge or Layer 2 switch

   Public data center:  internet data center which offers hosting or
             computing resources to many different clients

   SA:     Source Address

   ToR:    Top of Rack Switch. It is also known as access switch

   VDCS:    VPN oriented data center services

   VM:     Virtual Machines

   VPN:     Virtual Private Network

   VPN-o-CS: VPN oriented Computing Service

   VPN4DC:  Elastic VPN which can extend its VPN connectivity to, or
             shrink some of its connectivity's from, computing resources
             in public data centers










Dunbar                 Expires April 24, 2012                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      Problem statement for VPN4DC            2011-10-05


3. Connecting hosts in public Data Centers with a VPN

   Hosts in data centers are managed by data center operators which are
   assisted by their own resource and network management systems. VPNs
   are managed by network service providers, which are most likely
   different organizations. If enterprises want to offload their
   applications to public data centers and connect those
   purchased/leased resources with their own intranet via VPN, the
   enterprises have to do following steps separately:

      1. Contact data center operators to purchase computing resources

      2. Get network configuration from the data center operators on how
         and where their purchased hosts are placed

      3. Ask their VPN operators to add attachment circuits on the PEs
         which are adjacent to the data centers in which their hosts
         reside.

   One big issue associated with this process is that the client VPN's
   network provider may not have PEs in close proximity to the data
   centers from which clients' remote hosts are purchased or leased. It
   can be very difficult to connect hosts in 3rd party data centers to a
   provider VPN. Under this scenario, the only option is to use tunnels,
   e.g. IPSec, between 3rd party data centers and VPN provider PEs. This
   approach will definitely turn away some enterprises that have paid
   premium for their VPNs.

   When VPN service providers do have PEs co-located, or via secure
   links connected, with the 3rd party data centers from which clients'
   remote hosts are purchased, proper configuration on the PEs can be
   very challenging. The VPN operator has to know how their PEs are
   connected to the 3rd party data center gateway routers, what
   protocols are supported on the connections, which network segments
   have the hosts belonging to a particular VPN client, etc.. To get all
   those information accurately, a lot of coordination is needed among
   VPN clients, VPN service providers, and 3rd party data center
   operators. This process can be very long and error prone.

4. Hosts connectivity for VPN Oriented Data Center Service

   The VPN oriented data center service [VDCS] describes a service model
   where VPN clients can assume the computing resources purchased from
   VPN service providers are already linked with their corresponding
   VPNs.




Dunbar                 Expires April 24, 2012                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      Problem statement for VPN4DC            2011-10-05


   To enable those services, VPN service providers have PEs co-located
   with gateways of multiple data centers, which can be their own or 3rd
   party data centers.

   There are two cases of connectivity in VDCS service model:

      1. Strictly connectivity: PE is provisioned (by its own operators)
        in the same fashion as today's L3VPN. When a group of hosts
        belonging to client X are added to Data Center Y, the PE
        adjacent to Y is configured properly so that Client X's VPN can
        exchange routes with Client X owned hosts in Y.

      2. VPN attachment circuit configuration being triggered by data
        center gateway routers: When a group of hosts purchased by
        Client X are added to a Data Center Y, Y's gateway automatically
        triggers its adjacent PEs to add attachment circuits for the VPN
        which belongs to X, and then perform the Case #1 above for VPN-
        X's PEs to exchange routes with X's hosts in the data center Y.

   The Case #1 above will require a long and deep coordination between
   data center management systems and VPN management systems. The Data
   Center management systems have to pass out at least the following
   attributes associated with hosts belonging to Client X:

      - Which gateway routers from which Client X's hosts can be
        accessed

      - Which physical interfaces from which Client X's hosts can be
        accessed

      - Which logical interfaces, e.g. subnets, VLANs, or Data Center
        internal VPN ID, from which Client X's hosts can be accessed.

   Suppose those information can be provided by data center management
   systems, it is not a simple process for VPN management systems to map
   Client X's VPN ID with those network attributes from data center,
   figure out which PEs are actually connected with which Data Center
   Gateways and which ports on PEs are connected with DC gateway where
   Client X's hosts can be accessed. This process gets worse when a VPN
   client's hosts have to be placed in different data center locations
   for reasons like, regulatory, diverse locations for disaster
   recovery, etc.

   It is well known that network is only a small portion of the overall
   data center infrastructure. Most likely the data center networks are
   managed by a smaller separate team than their computing and storage
   services. Majority, if not all, Data Center's overall management


Dunbar                 Expires April 24, 2012                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      Problem statement for VPN4DC            2011-10-05


   systems don't have proper mechanism to get and record the information
   on which network segments are assigned to which clients. Therefore,
   it can take extremely long process to configure the PE properly for
   Case #1 above to work.

5. APIs between VPN PEs and Data Center Gateways

   Different data centers can have different network designs. The
   network segments on which a VPN client's hosts reside in different
   data centers can be represented by very different ways. For example,
   some data centers use VID to differentiate different clients, some
   data centers could use different subnet addresses, while other data
   centers could use its internal VPN IDs.

   There are simply too many attributes from too many different places
   to be coordinated in order to configure VPN PEs manageably. There is
   no protocol between data center server management systems and network
   management systems, and there is no protocol for VPN management
   systems to retrieve the needed network attributes from data center
   management systems. In addition, data center management systems are
   part of computing industry which is different industry from
   networking.

   If Data Center gateway routers can inform their adjacent VPN PEs on
   network attributes associated with hosts of a VPN client, the steps
   to get PEs configured properly will be much shorter and simpler. Even
   though PEs' VPN attachment circuit may not be configured directly by
   adjacent DC Gateway routers for security reasons, the network
   attributes passed from DC can be used by VPN network management
   system to properly configure the VPN PEs after some level of
   authentication.

   Therefore, it is very beneficial to have some open APIs between VPN
   PEs and DC gateway to simplify the steps needed for VPN PE
   configurations.

5.1. What to be communicated between VPN PEs and Data Center Gateways?

   The APIs between VPN PEs and their directly connected data center
   gateway should at least include the request for a group of hosts in a
   data center to join (or leave) a specific client's VPN.

   If a DC Gateway and PE are directly connected via an Ethernet
   interface, the network segment for a group of hosts belonging to a
   VPN client in data center can be easily represented by a VLAN
   identifier.



Dunbar                 Expires April 24, 2012                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      Problem statement for VPN4DC            2011-10-05


   If a data center gateway is connected with VPN PEs via OC-n
   interfaces, then the data center Gateway and VPN PEs have to reach
   agreement on how to differentiate traffic belonging to different VPN
   clients. If GRE encapsulation is used on the interfaces, the data
   center gateway and the VPN PE has to reach agreement on which outer
   IP address represents which VPN client.

   It is very common that Data Center network is not aware of provider
   VPN configuration, and vice versa. Provider VPN Management system has
   its own mapping between VPN client and its corresponding VPN
   identifier. Data Center Network management system also has its own
   mapping from client ID to a specific network segment, such as VLAN
   ID, ISID, or IP interface, etc.

   When Data Center Gateway sends a request to VPN PE for a network
   segment to be attached to a specific client's VPN, the information it
   has is the client identifier. Upon receiving the request, the PE has
   to authenticate the request with its own management system. Upon
   authenticating the request, the VPN management system has to map the
   client identifier, potentially a key, to the proper VPN identifier,
   and then configure the PE accordingly to get the VPN connected.

   As of now, there aren't any available solutions to enable this in-
   band communication between VPN and data center gateways.

6. Conclusion and Recommendation

    VPNs represent a major industry for service providers in the
    enterprise (revenues at billion dollar level). It is very important
    for VPN Service Providers to expand its VPN services with cloud Data
    Center services in a secure manner. Automation and end-to-end
    network integration is very important for VDCS.

    Therefore, we recommend IETF to investigate solutions to make it
    possible.

7. Manageability Considerations

   TBD



8. Security Considerations

   TBD.




Dunbar                 Expires April 24, 2012                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      Problem statement for VPN4DC            2011-10-05


9. IANA Considerations



10. Acknowledgments

   We want to acknowledge the following people for their valuable inputs
   to this draft: K.K.Ramakrishnan.

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.

11. References

   [VPN4DC-Req]  So, et al, "Requirements of Layer 3 Virtual Private
             Network for Data Centers", draft-so-VPN4DC-00, Oct 2011.

   [VDCS]  So, et al, "Requirement and Framework for VPN-Oriented Data
             Center Services", draft-so-vdcs-00, June 2011.




Authors' Addresses

   Linda Dunbar
   Huawei Technologies
   5340 Legacy Drive, Suite 175
   Plano, TX 75024, USA
   Phone: (469) 277 5840
   Email: ldunbar@huawei.com

   Ning So
   Verizon Inc.
   2400 N. Glenville Ave.,
   Richardson, TX75082
   ning.so@verizonbusiness.com


Intellectual Property Statement

   The IETF Trust takes no position regarding the validity or scope of
   any Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be
   claimed to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology
   described in any IETF Document or the extent to which any license
   under such rights might or might not be available; nor does it
   represent that it has made any independent effort to identify any
   such rights.


Dunbar                 Expires April 24, 2012                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      Problem statement for VPN4DC            2011-10-05


   Copies of Intellectual Property disclosures made to the IETF
   Secretariat and any assurances of licenses to be made available, or
   the result of an attempt made to obtain a general license or
   permission for the use of such proprietary rights by implementers or
   users of this specification can be obtained from the IETF on-line IPR
   repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement
   any standard or specification contained in an IETF Document. Please
   address the information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org.

Disclaimer of Validity

   All IETF Documents and the information contained therein are provided
   on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION HE/SHE
   REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET SOCIETY, THE
   IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE DISCLAIM ALL
   WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO ANY
   WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION THEREIN WILL NOT INFRINGE
   ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
   FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Acknowledgment

   Funding for the RFC Editor function is currently provided by the
   Internet Society.




















Dunbar                 Expires April 24, 2012                 [Page 9]

