


Network Working Group                                         Qilei Wang
Internet-Draft                                                  Xihua Fu
Intended status: Standards Track                         ZTE Corporation
Expires: September 1, 2012                                  Feb 29, 2012


          Framework for GMPLS Control of Flexible Grid Network
           draft-wang-ccamp-gmpls-flexigrid-framework-00.txt

Abstract

   This document provides a framework for applying Generalized Multi-
   Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) and the Path Computation Element
   (PCE) architecture to control the flexible grid network base on the
   Wavelength Switched Optical Networks (WSONs).  GMPLS control of WSON
   which is addressed in RFC6163 is out of the scope of this document.

   This document focuses on the topological elements changes and new
   path selection constraints that flexible grid technology takes.
   Impairments related technology is not covered in this document.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 1, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Qilei Wang & Xihua Fu   Expires September 1, 2012               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                flexible grid                     Feb 2012


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Conventions used in this document  . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Flexible Grid Networks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.1.  WDM Links  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     3.2.  Optical Transmitters and Receivers . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.3.  Optical Signals in Flexible Grid Network . . . . . . . . .  5
       3.3.1.  Optical Tributary Signals  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       3.3.2.  WSON Signal Characteristics  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.4.  ROADMs, OXCs, Splitters, Combiners, and FOADMs . . . . . .  6
       3.4.1.  Reconfigurable Optical Add/Drop Multiplexers, OXCs
               and FOADM  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       3.4.2.  Splitters and Combiners  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.5.  Electro-Optical Systems  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Routing and wavelength Assignment in flexible grid network . .  8
   5.  GMPLS and PCE Control  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     5.1.  Extension to GMPLS Signaling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.2.  Extension to GMPLS Routing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.3.  Optical Path Computation and Implications for PCE  . . . . 11
       5.3.1.  Optical Path Constraints and Electro-Optical
               Element Signal Compatibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       5.3.2.  Discovery of RWA-Capable PCEs  . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
















Qilei Wang & Xihua Fu   Expires September 1, 2012               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                flexible grid                     Feb 2012


1.  Introduction

   Flexible grid is a new DWDM application which is defined in the
   newest version of [G.694.1].  A flexible grid network can select its
   data channels with arbitrary slot width, and mainly be used to setup
   path with higher bitrates.  This is different from traditional fixed
   grid DWDM technology, which uses fixed slot width.  Flexible grid
   network is a WDM-based optical network in which switching is
   performed selectively based on the center wavelength of an optical
   signal as well as WSON, and flexible grid network can be constructed
   from subsystems that include Wavelength Division Multiplexing (WDM)
   links, tunable transmitters and receivers, Reconfigurable Optical
   Add/Drop Multiplexers (ROADMs), wavelength converters, and electro-
   optical network elements which are used in WSON, whereas these
   subsystems have flexible grid characteristics.

   Wavelength Switched Optical Network (WSON) is the application of
   Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) [RFC3945]
   operation to traditional fixed grid WDM network.  As described in the
   previous section, flexible grid network is a new WDM network which
   introduces some new characteristics, so GMPLS also can be used to
   operate flexible grid network.  WSON specific descriptions are out of
   the scope of this document.

   This document provides a framework for applying the GMPLS
   architecture and protocols [RFC3945] and the PCE architecture
   [RFC4655] to the control and operation of flexible grid networks.  In
   order to help GMPLS and PCE use for flexible grid network, this
   document first focuses on the subsystems and new characteristics
   information that flexible grid network brings and then modeled the
   characteristics information by GMPLS and PCE.  This work will help
   facilitate the development of protocol solution models and protocol
   extensions within the GMPLS and PCE protocol families.

1.1.  Conventions used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


2.  Terminology

   o  Flexible Grid: a new WDM technology different from traditional
      fixed grid DWDM technology defined with the aim of allowing
      flexible optical spectrum management, in which the Slot Width of
      the wavelength ranges allocated to different channels are flexible
      (variable sized).



Qilei Wang & Xihua Fu   Expires September 1, 2012               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                flexible grid                     Feb 2012


   o  Wavelength Range: [RFC6163] gives a description of this
      terminology.Wavelength range given a mapping between labels and
      the ITU-T grids, each range could be expressed in terms of a
      tuple, (lambda1, lambda2) or (freq1, freq2), where the lambdas or
      frequencies can be represented by 32-bit integers.

   o  Frequency slot: The definition in [G.694.1] is shown here.  The
      frequency range allocated to a channel and unavailable to other
      channels within a flexible grid.  A frequency slot is defined by
      its nominal central frequency and its slot width.

   o  Slot width: The full width of a frequency slot in a flexible grid.


3.  Flexible Grid Networks

   Wavelength Switched Optical Network (WSON) related documents cover
   the constraints information that needs to be considered by Path
   Computation Element (PCE).  Emergence of flexible grid DWDM
   technology raises some new features that would be considered in the
   process of path computation.  This section examines the flexible grid
   subsystems' new features and mainly focuses on the new features or
   constraints information that impact the flexible grid path selection
   process (i.e. wavelength selection).  The subsequent sections which
   follow the sequence of the section addressed in [RFC6163] review and
   model some new features that need to be emphasized by control plane.

3.1.  WDM Links

   According to the newest version of [G.694.1], the nominal central
   frequencies for the flexible grid network are defined with a
   granularity of 6.25 GHz and the frequency slot widths are defined as
   a multiple of 12.5 GHz.  As described in section 3.1 of [RFC 6163],
   parameters that include wavelength range and channel spacing is
   needed to perform basic, impairment-unaware modeling of a WDM link.
   Wavelength range can be used to give a mapping between labels and the
   ITU-T grids and each range could be expressed in terms of a tuple,
   (lambda1, lambda2) or (freq1, freq2).  Wavelength range is also
   needed in flexible grid network, but some changes are required when
   consider the flexible feature.  Channel spacing is also needed, but
   new channel spacing needs to be added to this field base on WSON when
   used in flexible grid network.  In addition to the wavelength range
   and channel spacing, indication SHOULD also be added to indicate the
   link support flexible grid DWDM technology.

   Similar to WSON, this information is relatively statically for a
   particular link.  Such information may be used locally during
   wavelength assignment via signaling.



Qilei Wang & Xihua Fu   Expires September 1, 2012               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                flexible grid                     Feb 2012


3.2.  Optical Transmitters and Receivers

   WDM optical systems make use of optical transmitters and receivers
   utilizing different wavelengths (frequencies).  Flexible grid brings
   some new features to transmitters and receivers compare to
   traditional fixed grid technology.  Besides characteristics like
   "Tunable", "Tuning range", "Tuning time" and "Spectral
   characteristics and stability" which are addressed in [RFC6163], some
   new features could also impact optical transmitters and receivers in
   the process of control plane path computation.  Before model the new
   features from control plane perspective, focus SHOULD be paid to the
   old modeling parameters (here we mainly focus on "Tuning range"),
   because flexible grid may bring changes to these parameters.  "Tuning
   range" may be encode by some different format from traditional fixed
   grid technology, as nominal central frequencies can't be figured out
   before the path setup in flexible grid network.

   New features that would impact optical transmitters and receivers in
   the process of control plane path computation are listed below:

   Slot width: main difference between flexible grid and traditional
   fixed grid is flexible grid network can select its data channels with
   arbitrary slot width compare to fixed slot width in traditional fixed
   grid network.  This parameter indicates slot width needed by a
   transmitter or receiver and SHOULD be considered in the process of
   path computation.

3.3.  Optical Signals in Flexible Grid Network

   The fundamental unit of switching in WSONs is intuitively that of a
   "wavelength".  The transmitters and receivers in these networks will
   deal with one wavelength at a time, while the switching systems
   themselves can deal with multiple wavelengths at a time.  Key non-
   impairment-related parameters which are listed in [RFC6163] are shown
   below:


   o  (a) Minimum channel spacing (GHz)

   o  (b) Minimum and maximum central frequency

   o  (c) Bitrates/Line coding (modulation) of optical tributary signals


   For the purposes of modeling the WSON in the control plane, new
   parameters that SHOULD be considered are shown here:





Qilei Wang & Xihua Fu   Expires September 1, 2012               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                flexible grid                     Feb 2012


   o  (d) Minimum and Maximum Slot Width

   o  (e) Slot Width


   (d) is considered properties of the link and restrictions on the
   GMPLS Labels and (e) is a property of the "signal".

3.3.1.  Optical Tributary Signals

   In [RFC6163], "optical tributary signal classes" are characterized by
   a modulation format and bitrates range and both of them are key
   parameters in characterizing the optical tributary signal.  Note
   that, with advances in technology, more optical tributary signal
   classes would be added in flexible grid network.  Currently no more
   parameters are needed to depict flexible grid network in the process
   of path computation.

   New parameter "slot width" is needed here, and SHOULD be specified in
   the signaling process of flexible grid path, because paths in
   flexible grid network often with variable slot width.

3.3.2.  WSON Signal Characteristics

   Description about WSON signal characteristics in [RFC6163] also can
   be applied to this document.  Fundamental unit of switching in
   flexible grid network is also "wavelength".  WSON signal
   characteristics like optical tributary signal class (modulation
   format), forward error correction (FEC), central frequency
   (wavelength), bitrates and general protocol identifier (G-PID) are
   still used in flexible grid network in the process of path
   computation and some more modulation formats and FECs may be added to
   describe flexible grid network signal characteristics.

   Except the parameter that have been included in [RFC6163], the
   parameter (i.e., slot width) described in the previous section is
   also needed here, WSON signal would convey this value in the process
   of path computation in order to select a suitable path.

3.4.  ROADMs, OXCs, Splitters, Combiners, and FOADMs

   This section mainly focuses on optical devices such as ROADMs,
   Optical Cross-Connects (OXCs), splitters, combiners, and Fixed
   Optical Add/Drop Multiplexers (FOADMs) which can be used in flexible
   grid network and examines their parameters of these devices that can
   be used in the process of control plane path computation.





Qilei Wang & Xihua Fu   Expires September 1, 2012               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                flexible grid                     Feb 2012


3.4.1.  Reconfigurable Optical Add/Drop Multiplexers, OXCs and FOADM

   Switched connectivity matrix is needed here to show whether a
   wavelength on input port can be connected to an output port.

   Besides switched connectivity matrix and wavelength restrictions
   included in [RFC6163], new wavelength restriction of a port on a
   ROADM which are brought by flexible grid SHOULD be considered.  A
   port on a ROADM could have following wavelength restrictions in
   flexible grid:


   o  (a) Maximum/Minimum slot width that a port support

      Requirements and descriptions about the restrictions information
      can be found in
      [draft-wangl-ccamp-ospf-ext-constraint-flexi-grid].

   o  (b) Wavelength ranges partition information according to bitrates
      and/or modulation format

      This restrictions information will help reduce fragments in
      flexible grid network.  Requirements related description can be
      found in
      [draft-wang-ccamp-flexible-grid-wavelength-range-ospf-te].

   These restrictions information can also be applied to fixed optical
   Add/Drop Multiplexers.

3.4.2.  Splitters and Combiners

   Nothing is new except switched connectivity matrix and this has been
   addressed in [RFC6163].

3.5.  Electro-Optical Systems

   OEO switches, wavelength converters, and regenerators all share a
   similar property: they can be more or less "transparent" to an
   "optical signal" depending on their functionality and/or
   implementation.  Properties that are described in [RFC6163] can be
   applied to flexible grid, and these properties can satisfy path
   computation without taking ant new features into consideration.
   Modeling of OEO switches, wavelength converters and regenerators can
   also be applied to flexible grid.

   Regenerator can be used to restore signal quality.  Bitrates range
   and modulation formats that the regenerator support need to be used
   to help path computation, whereas slot width do not (May be someone



Qilei Wang & Xihua Fu   Expires September 1, 2012               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                flexible grid                     Feb 2012


   will talk about slot width).  If one regenerator is designed to
   handle signal with specific bitrates and modulation formats, then it
   would support the corresponding slot width because slot width can be
   derived by modulation format and bitrates.  Even if the slot width is
   changed by the electro-optical systems due to the change of
   modulation format, the slot width that has already changed may not be
   explicitly specified because bitrates and modulation format are
   explicitly specified.


4.  Routing and wavelength Assignment in flexible grid network

   This section briefly describes the constraints information of routing
   and wavelength assignment in the flexible grid network.  The input to
   basic RWA in flexible grid network are the requested optical path's
   source and destination, the network topology, the locations and
   capabilities of any wavelength converters, the wavelengths available
   on each optical link and port label constraints information such as
   slot width range that a port support and wavelength range partition
   information by bitrates and/or modulation formats.  The output that
   provided by RWA in flexible grid network are an explicit route
   through ROADMs, a wavelength for optical transmitter, the slot width
   that this wavelength occupies, and a set of locations (generally
   associated with ROADMs or switches) where wavelength conversion is to
   occur and the new wavelength to be used on each component link after
   that point in the route.

   In [RFC6163], three different ways of performing RWA in conjunction
   with the control plane are shown here:

   1)  Combined RWA

   2)  Separated R and WA (R + WA)

   3)  Routing and Distributed WA (R + DWA)

   These ways can also be applied to flexible grid control plane path
   computation.  Related description about these three architectures can
   be found in [RFC6163].


5.  GMPLS and PCE Control

   Flexible grid brings some new features to WDM network, and
   consequently WSON would add some extensions or change in order to
   adapt to control of flexible grid.  Extensions to GMPLS signaling,
   routing and PCE are described in this section.




Qilei Wang & Xihua Fu   Expires September 1, 2012               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                flexible grid                     Feb 2012


5.1.  Extension to GMPLS Signaling

   Support for WSON signaling exists in [RFC3471], [RFC4328] and
   [draft-ietf-ccamp-wson-signaling].  However, a number of practical
   issues arise in the identification of wavelengths and signals in
   wavelength assignment in flexible grid.

   A mapping between label and wavelength is needed to simplify the
   characterization of WDM links and WSON devices.  The mapping like the
   one described in [draft-farrkingel-ccamp-flexigrid-lambda-label]
   provides label and wavelength mapping for communication between PCE
   and WSON PCCs.  Different LSP may occupy different slot width if
   paths have different bitrates and modulation format in flexible grid
   network.  So in the flexible grid network, not only central frequency
   is needed, but also slot width SHOULD be included to identify a
   channel in the process of path computation in flexible grid network.

   GMPLS Signaling should be able to convey the central frequency and
   slot width information in the process of path request of a LSC LSP.
   If the slot width is changed due to the change of modulation format,
   signaling should also be able to express this.  Except methods that
   are specified in [draft-farrkingel-ccamp-flexigrid-lambda-label],
   [draft-hussain-ccamp-super-channel-label] and
   [draft-zhang-ccamp-flexible-grid-rsvp-te-ext] also provide methods to
   carry central frequency and slot width information in the process of
   signaling.

   Note: extension to GMPLS signaling SHOULD be compatible with current
   signaling protocol.

5.2.  Extension to GMPLS Routing

   The following subsystem's properties are needed by IGP to minimally
   characterize WSON, also these properties are needed to characterize
   flexible grid control plane.  This section addresses the constraints
   information needed to model flexible grid from the control plane
   perspective base on the Wavelength Switched Optical Network (WSON).

   1)  1.  WDM link properties (allowed wavelengths)

   2)  2.  Optical transmitters (wavelength range)

   3)  3.  ROADM/FOADM properties (connectivity matrix, port wavelength
       restrictions)







Qilei Wang & Xihua Fu   Expires September 1, 2012               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                flexible grid                     Feb 2012


   4)  4.  Wavelength converter properties (per network element, may
       change if a common limited shared pool is used)

   Here 1, 2 and 3 are re-considered in the flexible grid network.
   Firstly, wavelengths available on WDM link and port of optical
   transmitters are advertised through routing protocol, the wavelength
   available information can be used by path computation element to
   compute a suitable end-to-end LSP.  As different flexible grid
   channels always have different slot widths and channels' central
   frequency position and slot width can't be decided in advance, so
   mapping between label and wavelength may not be able to use the
   representation similar to [RFC6205] to represent every channel.  New
   label formats and representation of wavelength available are needed
   in routing protocol to transfer IGP information between nodes and
   PCEs.  Extensions to label set field SHOULD be able to represent the
   wavelength available validly in flexible grid network.  Allowed
   wavelengths on WDM link and wavelength range on optical transmitters
   would adapt to this
   change.[draft-dhillon-ccamp-super-channel-ospfte-ext],
   [draft-wangl-ccamp-ospf-ext-constraint-flexi-grid] and
   [draft-zhang-ccamp-flexible-grid-ospf-ext] give some different
   methods to represent the available wavelengths.

   Secondly, some new ROADM/FOADM properties brought by flexible grid
   need to be advertised by routing protocol in order to help path
   computation.  In the section 3, properties of ROADM/FOADM are
   described.  The first one, maximum/minimum slot width supported on
   one port need to be advertised.  This slot width constraint
   information of a port (i.e., slot width constraint information of a
   WSS) SHOULD be known by path computation element in order to compute
   a suitable path.  Ports on a link may support different grid
   granularities and slot widths.  LMP can be run between two neighbor
   nodes to negotiate these attributes and related extension can be
   found in [draft-li-ccamp-grid-property-lmp].  This is optional
   because routing protocol can also be used to deal with it.  The
   second one, wavelength range allocation information of ROADM/FOADM
   needs to be advertised through routing protocol.  Grouping of
   wavelength of the same bitrates and/or modulation formats would help
   reduce fragments.  Channels in the same wavelength range with the
   same bitrates looks almost like fixed grid technology, and they won't
   generate much fragment in the path setup and release because every
   channel use the same slot width.  Requirements of wavelength range
   allocation and protocol extensions can be found in
   [draft-wang-ccamp-flexible-grid-wavelength-range-ospf-te].







Qilei Wang & Xihua Fu   Expires September 1, 2012              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                flexible grid                     Feb 2012


5.3.  Optical Path Computation and Implications for PCE

   Extensions to PCEP can be found in [draft-lee-pce-wson-rwa-ext] base
   on Wavelength Switched Optical Network.  Emergence of flexible grid
   brings some extension to current draft.  PCEP SHOULD be able to
   support flexible grid path computation.

5.3.1.  Optical Path Constraints and Electro-Optical Element Signal
        Compatibility

   Flexible grid may not change the computation architectures of WSON,
   but new constraints information is needed in the process of path
   computation.  When requesting a path computation to PCE, the PCC
   should be able to indicate the G-PID type of an LSP, the signal
   attributes at the transmitter and receiver.  As no new attribute need
   to be considered, no implication is indicated here.

   And the PCE should be able to respond to the PCC with the following
   except the conformity of the requested optical characteristics
   associated with the resulting LSP with the source, sink, and NE along
   the LSP and additional LSP attributes modified along the path:

   ~ Slot width of the path should be respond to the PCC as flexible
   grid channels may have different slot widths.

5.3.2.   Discovery of RWA-Capable PCEs

   > Not all PCEs within a domain would necessarily need the capability
   of flexible grid path computation.  Therefore, it would be useful to
   indicate that a PCE has the ability to deal with flexible grid via
   the discovery mechanisms being established for PCE discovery in
   [RFC5088].  Extensions to [RFC5088] are needed to achieve this goal.


6.  Security Considerations

   TBD


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3945]  Mannie, E., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching
              (GMPLS) Architecture", RFC 3945, October 2004.



Qilei Wang & Xihua Fu   Expires September 1, 2012              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                flexible grid                     Feb 2012


7.2.  Informative References

   [G.694.1 v1]
              International Telecommunications Union, "Draft revised
              G.694.1 version 1.3".

   [flexible-grid-ospf-ext]
              Fatai Zhang, Xiaobing Zi, Ramon Casellas, O. Gonzalez de
              Dios, and D. Ceccarelli, "GMPLS OSPF-TE Extensions in
              support of Flexible-Grid in DWDM Networks",
              draft-zhang-ccamp-flexible-grid-ospf-ext-00.txt .

   [flexible-grid-requirements]
              Fatai Zhang, Xiaobing Zi, O. Gonzalez de Dios, and Ramon
              Casellas, "Requirements for GMPLS Control of Flexible
              Grids",
              draft-zhang-ccamp-flexible-grid-requirements-01.txt .

   [flexible-grid-rsvp-te]
              Fatai Zhang, O. Gonzalez de Dios, and D. Ceccarelli,
              "RSVP-TE Signaling Extensions in support of Flexible
              Grid",
              draft-zhang-ccamp-flexible-grid-rsvp-te-ext-00.txt .

   [flexigrid-lambda-label]
              D. King, A. Farrel, Y. Li, F. Zhang, and R. Casellas,
              "Generalized Labels for the Flexi-Grid in Lambda-Switch-
              Capable (LSC) Label Switching Routers",
              draft-farrkingel-ccamp-flexigrid-lambda-label-01.txt .

   [ospf-ext-constraint-flexi-grid]
              L Wang, Y Li, "OSPF Extensions for Routing Constraint
              Encoding in Flexible-Grid Networks",
              draft-wangl-ccamp-ospf-ext-constraint-flexi-grid-00.txt .

   [super-channel-label]
              Iftekhar Hussain, Abinder Dhillon, Zhong Pan, Marco Sosa
              and Bert Basch, Steve Liu, Andrew G. Malis, "Generalized
              Label for Super-Channel Assignment on Flexible Grid",
              draft-hussain-ccamp-super-channel-label-02.txt .

   [super-channel-ospfte]
              Abinder Dhillon, Iftekhar Hussain, Rajan Rao, Marco Sosa,
              "OSPFTE extension to support GMPLS for Flex Grid",
              draft-dhillon-ccamp-super-channel-ospfte-ext-02.txt .






Qilei Wang & Xihua Fu   Expires September 1, 2012              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                flexible grid                     Feb 2012


Authors' Addresses

   Qilei Wang
   ZTE Corporation

   Email: wang.qilei@zte.com.cn


   Xihua Fu
   ZTE Corporation
   ZTE Plaza, No.10, Tangyan South Road, Gaoxin District
   Xi'an
   P.R.China

   Email: fu.xihua@zte.com.cn




































Qilei Wang & Xihua Fu   Expires September 1, 2012              [Page 13]

