


Network Working Group                                            Q. Wang
Internet-Draft                                                     X. Fu
Intended status: Standards Track                                  G. Liu
Expires: April 20, 2012                                  ZTE Corporation
                                                            Oct 18, 2011


                Requirements for GMPLS Routing for ASON
                     draft-wang-ccamp-rfc4258bis-00

Abstract

   The Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) suite of
   protocols has been defined to control different switching
   technologies as well as different applications.  These include
   support for requesting Time Division Multiplexing (TDM) connections
   including Synchronous Optical Network (SONET)/Synchronous Digital
   Hierarchy (SDH) and Optical Transport Networks (OTNs).

   Along with the development of technology, some new routing
   requirements which are addressed in G.7715.1 emerge.  This document
   concentrates on the new routing requirements addressed in G.7715.1
   and placed on the GMPLS suite of protocols in order to support the
   capabilities and functionalities of an Automatically Switched Optical
   Network (ASON) as defined by the ITU-T.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 20, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.




Wang, et al.             Expires April 20, 2012                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   Requirements for GMPLS Routing for ASON        Oct 2011


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     1.1.  Conventions Used in This Document . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  New Routing Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  New Routing Attributes  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     5.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     5.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6





























Wang, et al.             Expires April 20, 2012                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   Requirements for GMPLS Routing for ASON        Oct 2011


1.  Introduction

   The Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) suite of
   protocols provides, among other capabilities, support for controlling
   different switching technologies.  These include support for
   requesting TDM connections utilizing SONET/SDH (see [T1.105] and
   [G.707], respectively) as well as Optical Transport Networks (OTNs,
   see [G.709]).  However, there are certain capabilities that are
   needed to support the ITU-T G.8080 control plane architecture for an
   Automatically Switched Optical Network (ASON).  Therefore, it is
   desirable to understand the corresponding requirements for the GMPLS
   protocol suite.  The ASON control plane architecture is defined in
   [G.8080]; ASON routing requirements are identified in [G.7715] and in
   [G.7715.1] for ASON link state protocols.  These Recommendations
   apply to all [G.805] layer networks (e.g., SDH and OTN), and provide
   protocol-neutral functional requirements and architecture.

   RFC4258 focuses on the routing requirements for the GMPLS suite of
   protocols to support the capabilities and functionality of ASON
   control planes.  Along with the development of technology, some new
   routing technology emerged in G.7715.1, whereas not in RFC4258.  So
   this document mainly focuses on these new routing requirements which
   are not addressed in RFC4258.  This document does not address GMPLS
   applicability or GMPLS capabilities.  Any protocol (in particular,
   routing) applicability, design, or suggested extensions are strictly
   outside the scope of this document.

1.1.  Conventions Used in This Document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   Although [RFC2119] describes interpretations of these key words in
   terms of protocol specifications and implementations, they are used
   in this document to describe design requirements for protocol
   extensions.


2.  New Routing Requirements

   Routing for transport networks is performed on a per-layer basis,
   where the routing paradigms MAY differ among layers and within a
   layer.  Not all equipment supports the same set of transport layers
   or the same degree of connection flexibility at any given layer.  A
   difference of the definition of layer exists between G.800 and G.8080
   and each <Switching Type, Encoding Type, Signal Type> SHOULD be
   treated as a separate layer.  While RFC4258 addresses the routing



Wang, et al.             Expires April 20, 2012                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   Requirements for GMPLS Routing for ASON        Oct 2011


   requirement that signal types can also be advertised, different
   attributes (e.g., link weight, resource class, SRG) SHOULD also be
   able to be advertised per signal type.

   While RFC4258 describes in section 5.1 how to identify links that go
   between "technology regions" (cf. RFC4206), it doesn't handle the
   identification of layers that exist within regions.  For example,
   when refer to TDM technology region, multiple layers (e.g., VC3 vs
   VC4 within the TDM/SDH) MAY exist within one technology region.  In
   order to explicitly identify these layers, Switching/termination
   capabilities of a link end SHOULD be introduced to address this.

   Multiple adaption methods MAY exist between layers (e.g., X.86 vs
   GFP, 802.3 vs Ethernet V2), so there SHOULD be a mechanism introduced
   to identify the specific client adaption methods supported on a link
   end.  This is a new routing requirement that is not addressed by
   RFC4258.



3.  New Routing Attributes

   The new routing requirements and attributes described in section 3
   mainly pertain to link attributes, so in this draft, this section
   mainly focuses on the updates to the routing requirements of link
   attributes on the basis of RFC4258.  That is to say, except the
   routing requirements of link attributes described in this section,
   the other routing requirements are in accordance with RFC4258.  So
   before you read this draft, make sure you are familiar with RFC4258.

   The section 4.1.4 of RFC4258 describes the link attributes of ASON
   routing architecture and requirements.  Link attributes include local
   SNPP link ID, remote SNPP link ID and layer specific characteristic.
   This document has nothing to do with local SNPP link ID and remote
   SNPP link ID, while new routing requirements are only added to the
   layer specific characteristics.

   Table 3 of RFC4258 lists the link characteristics which is also
   included followed.  New routing requirements described here that are
   related to the corresponding link characteristics are Signal Type,
   Local Adaptation Support and Termination/Switching Identification.










Wang, et al.             Expires April 20, 2012                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   Requirements for GMPLS Routing for ASON        Oct 2011


      Link Characteristics                   Capability      Usage
      -----------------------                ----------      ---------
      Signal Type                            REQUIRED        OPTIONAL
      Link Weight                            REQUIRED        OPTIONAL
      Resource Class                         REQUIRED        OPTIONAL
      Local Connection Types                 REQUIRED        OPTIONAL
      Link Capacity                          REQUIRED        OPTIONAL
      Link Availability                      OPTIONAL        OPTIONAL
      Diversity Support                      OPTIONAL        OPTIONAL
      Local Adaptation Support               OPTIONAL        OPTIONAL
      Termination/Switching Identification   OPTIONAL        OPTIONAL


                      Figure 1: Format of the sub-TLV

   - Signal Type: This identifies the characteristic information of the
   layer network.  Attributes of one signal SHALL be able to be
   advertised following the relational signal type.  The signal
   attributes indicated here is a new routing requirement to RFC4258.

   - Link Weight: This is the metric indicating the relative
   desirability of a particular link over another, e.g., during path
   computation.

   - Resource Class: This corresponds to the set of administrative
   groups assigned by the operator to this link.  A link MAY belong to
   zero, one, or more administrative groups.

   - Local Connection Types: This attribute identifies whether the local
   SNP represents a Termination Connection Point (CP), a Connection
   Point (CP), or can be flexibly configured as a TCP.

   - Link Capacity: This provides the sum of the available and potential
   bandwidth capacity for a particular network transport layer.  Other
   capacity measures MAY be further considered.

   - Link Availability: This represents the survivability capability
   such as the protection type associated with the link.

   - Diversity Support: This represents diversity information such as
   the SRLG information associated with the link.

   - Local Adaptation Support: This indicates the set of client layer
   adaptations supported by the TCP associated with the local SNPP.
   This is applicable only when the local SNP represents a TCP or can be
   flexibly configured as a TCP.  A new requirement is that a mechanism
   SHOULD be introduced to identify the specific client adaption methods
   supported on a link end when multiple adaption methods exist between



Wang, et al.             Expires April 20, 2012                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   Requirements for GMPLS Routing for ASON        Oct 2011


   layers.

   - Termination/Switching Identification: Capability introduced to
   handle the identification of layers that exist within regions (e.g.,
   VC3 vs VC4 within the TDM/SDH).  This is a new routing requirement to
   RFC4258.


4.  Security Considerations

   TBD


5.  References

5.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC5787]  Papadimitriou, D., "OSPFv2 Routing Protocols Extensions
              for Automatically Switched Optical Network (ASON)
              Routing", RFC 5787, March 2010.

5.2.  Informative References

   [G.709]    ITU-T Recommendation G.709, "Interfaces for the Optical
              Transport Network (OTN)", December 2009.

   [G.7715.1]
              "ASON Routing Architecture and Requirements for Link State
              Protocols", ITU-T Draft Rec. G.7715.1/Y.1706.1 ,
              December 2007.

   [RFC4258]  Brungard, D., "Requirements for Generalized Multi-Protocol
              Label Switching (GMPLS) Routing for the Automatically
              Switched Optical Network (ASON)", RFC 4258, November 2005.














Wang, et al.             Expires April 20, 2012                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   Requirements for GMPLS Routing for ASON        Oct 2011


Authors' Addresses

   Qilei Wang
   ZTE Corporation
   No.68 ZiJingHua Road,Yuhuatai District
   Nanjing  210012
   P.R.China

   Email: wang.qilei@zte.com.cn
   URI:   http://wwwen.zte.com.cn/


   Xihua Fu
   ZTE Corporation
   West District,ZTE Plaza,No.10,Tangyan South Road,Gaoxin District
   Xi An  710065
   P.R.China

   Phone: +8613798412242
   Email: fu.xihua@zte.com.cn
   URI:   http://wwwen.zte.com.cn/


   Guoman Liu
   ZTE Corporation
   No.68 ZiJingHua Road,Yuhuatai District
   Nanjing  210012
   P.R.China

   Email: liu.guoman@zte.com.cn
   URI:   http://wwwen.zte.com.cn/




















Wang, et al.             Expires April 20, 2012                 [Page 7]

