


Network Working Group                                            Y. Wang
Internet-Draft                                                     Y. Gu
Intended status: Informational                                  D. Zhang
Expires: June 22, 2013                                            Huawei
                                                       December 19, 2012


                 vFW state migration problem statement
                draft-wang-state-migration-vfirewall-00

Abstract

   This draft introduces the state migration issues with the virtual
   security mechanisms (e.g., virtual firewalls) in data centers caused
   by the immgration of the virtual machines.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 22, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents



Wang, et al.              Expires June 22, 2013                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated-Title              December 2012


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Server Virtualization and the Imposed Issues  . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  A case of vFW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  vFW state migration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   8.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   9.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
































Wang, et al.              Expires June 22, 2013                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated-Title              December 2012


1.  Introduction

   The development of data center networks (DC networks) imposes new
   challenges to security mechanisms.  A DC network may need to support
   up to hundreds of thousands of virtual machines which belong to
   different tenants.  The virtual machines may be move amongst
   different physical servers for efficiency, maintaince or discater
   recovery and ect.  These virtual machines may create large amounts of
   traffics.

   To adapt the new features of data center networks, the solutions of
   virtualizing security mechanisms are proposed.  Generally, there are
   two types of security virtualization soltuions, "one-to-many" or
   "many to one".  In a "one two many" solution, a physical security
   device can act as multiple virtual security device for different
   tenants.  In a "many to one" solution, multiple hardware of software
   security devices cooperate to privide services for the purposes of
   e.g., scabability, and efficiency.  The cooperating procedures
   amongst the security devices are covered from tentents.  A tentent
   can only see a vitualized security device.

   Virtual Firewalls (VFWs) are an instance of "many to one" solution.
   A virtual Firwalls consists of multiples hardware or software sub-
   Firewalls located in different positions of a DC network.  Each sub-
   Firewall manage a certain part of the network.  The sub-Firewallls
   may be coordinated by a centralized server.

   The migration of VMs brought some serious issues to vFWs.  For
   instance, when a VM moves from an place to another, the traffic the
   VM generates may be transported to and processed by a different sub-
   Firewall.  When receiving a packet sent to or from the migrated VM,
   the sub-Firewall may find it lacks sufficient state information to
   correctly process the packet.  Such information includes: statistic
   inforamtion about a flow, ACL, and other security policies.

   This draft focus on analyzing the state migiration requirements on
   vFWs which are brought by the migration of VMs


2.  Terminology

   DC: Data Center

   VFW: Virtual FireWall

   VM: Virtual Machine.

   AR: Access Router



Wang, et al.              Expires June 22, 2013                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated-Title              December 2012


3.  Server Virtualization and the Imposed Issues

   Server virtualization technologies have made a very significant
   development in recent years.  The ratio of virtualized machine (VM)
   to physical server keeps increasing.  This enables Data Center
   Providers to efficiently make use of their infrastructure resources
   to support more tenants.

   In typical server virtualization mechanism, there are, usually, a VM
   manager, a virtualization platform, and public APIs.  The following
   diagram shows a brief example of server virtualization components.

    ----------
    | VM Mgr |
    ---------- \
                \
                 \
                  ---------------------
                  |  APP      VM  VM  |
                  |   |        |   |  |
                  | --+--------+---+- |
                  | |  Hypervisor   | |
                  | ----------------- |
                  ---------------------

   Everything has its pros can cons.  Server virtualization complicates
   security mechanism as well as explores infrastructure resources.  For
   instance , in a traditional Data Center, access routers (ARs), core
   layer switchs, aggregation layer switch and access layer switchs are
   organized from up to down in a hierachical way, and the security
   devices within the data center, e.g. a pair of redundant Firewalls,
   are placed at the top of Data Center network, usually on the AR.  All
   the packets that need inspection are forwarded to the security
   devices at the top of the network.  It is not a big a problem when
   only physical servers are deployed, since the network devices
   interfaces limit the amount of servers accessing to the network and
   the traffic they generate.

   However, the virtualization technologies times the amount of servers
   that a network has to serve, and the amount of traffic that a
   centralized security device needs to deal with increases
   coorespondently, which is a heavy burden to the centralized security
   devices mentioned above.  In addtion, a new feature of the traffic in
   data centers is that the communication amongst the servers within a
   data center increases.  The traditional centralized security solution
   will force such traffic to traverse un-optimized paths.

   A trend in Data Centers, and Data Center providers already do it, is



Wang, et al.              Expires June 22, 2013                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated-Title              December 2012


   to adopt a kind of more flat structure, less layers and distributed
   security devices on distributed switches.  This structure enables
   less processing path and reduce performance bottleneck.  It is a
   reasonable and important change.

   At the same time, the work of virtualizing security devices is
   undertaken.  Mutiple virtualization OS vendors extend their
   virtualization platform capability in supporting security functions
   by either developing their own virtualized security devices in server
   or providing public APIs for others to use their embedded security
   functions on Hypervisor.  Network device vendors also attempts expand
   their Data Center solution into servers, they develop virtual switch
   and virtual security engines that can co-work with Hypervisor
   infrastructure.

   The benefit of virtual security mechanisms is obvious.  First, Not
   all of the traffic has to pass through the network from bottom to
   top, which optimizes traffic paths and then saves bandwidth,
   Secondly, virtial security mechanims can easily distribute the
   overhead of processing packets into different virtual devices.
   Therefore, compared with the centrialized security solution, a
   virtual security mechanism has its advantage in providing the
   accurate but resource-consuming security functionalities, e.g.,
   inspecting traffic on layer 4 and higher, for a large amount of
   tenants.  Such security functionalities is desired for the security
   protection of data centers.


4.  A case of vFW

   There are various ways to implement vFWs.  However, such differences
   in implementation do not affect the analysis in this section.
   Therefore, without losing generality but benefiting the discussion,
   in this section, we assume vFWs are deployed in servers and make use
   of the public APIs provided by server virtualization providers to
   achieve its functionalitiy.  An abstracted way of vFW deployment is
   shown in following diagram.














Wang, et al.              Expires June 22, 2013                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated-Title              December 2012


    ----------
    | VM Mgr |
    ---------- \
                \
                 \
                  ----------------------------
    ----------    | ---------                |
    |FW      |    | |FW     |                |
    |Policies|----+-|Polices|                |
    |Mgr     |    | |Agent  |                |
    ----------    | ---+-----                |
                  |    |                     |
                  |    |           APP VMs   |
                  |    |            |   |..  |
                  | ---+------------+---+-   |
                  | |  |                 |   |
                  | | -------- Hypervisor|   |
                  | | |FW    |           |   |
                  | | |Engine|           |   |
                  | | --------           |   |
                  | ----------------------   |
                  ----------------------------

   The steps of vFW mechanism are as follows.  As a common knowledge,
   people can used different technical details even with a same
   architecture, there are other ways to fulfill the similar function as
   described in below.

   1) FW Policies Mgr distributes VM policies on FW Policies Agent.(It
   can also be a pull way, that is Agent pulls the policies from Mgr
   according to the traffic it receives.)

   2) FW Engine executes VM policies by inspecting VM's traffic.  The
   policies on FW Engine is achieved from FW Polices Agent by either a
   push way or a pull way.  FW Engine can only deal with traffic with
   simple polices, e.g. pass or deny.  It can't implement complicated
   policies, so it's called a Fast Path of processing.

   3) For the traffic that need complicate inspection, FW Engine will
   make the traffic go through FW Policies Agent by some way.

   4) FW Policies Agent deals with the traffic and record the state of
   the traffic for future inspection.  It's called Slow Path of
   Processing.

   5) FW Policies Agent transfers or drops the traffic packets according
   to policies.




Wang, et al.              Expires June 22, 2013                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated-Title              December 2012


5.  vFW state migration

   In this section, we analyze the situation of VM live migration and
   corresponding state migration.  There are lots of discussion of VM
   live migration in IETF, NV03 WG, SAMI mail list and in
   draft-gu-statemigration-framework, we won't introduce more in our
   draft.  The state we discuss in this draft is flow-associated state,
   here we copy the definition in draft-gu-statemigration-framework.
   The flow-associated state is usually instantiated through a
   combination of traffic inspection and broad policies, but may also be
   created by the use of an explicit request or signaling mechanism.
   Refer to Sec 4 for more introduce of flow-associated state.

   Assuming a VM is communicating with other VMs or with external peers,
   and the VM has complex policies which makes its traffic has to pass
   through FW Policies Agent and the Agent records the state of traffic.
   At a time, VM begin to migrate to a new place, the traffic is stopped
   at the old location, VM migrating and state on FW Policies Agent also
   migrating to the new FW Policies Agent at new location (server), then
   the traffic resumes at the new location.

   In this scenario, it's similar to the state migration on physical
   servers as vFW state migration also need to do the following things.

   o Recognizing when an endpoint is staring migration

   o Locating vFW at the old location

   o Locating vFW at the new location

   o Getting a copy of state from vFW at the old location

   o Installing that state in vFW at the new location

   We believe state migration is needed in some, if not all, virtual
   security mechanisms, especially when the security mechanism is
   provided by a second party rather than the server virtualization
   vendor.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.

   Note to RFC Editor: this section may be removed on publication as an
   RFC.





Wang, et al.              Expires June 22, 2013                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              Abbreviated-Title              December 2012


7.  Security Considerations

   TBD


8.  Acknowledgements


9.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.


Authors' Addresses

   Yuchen Wang
   Huawei

   Email: wangyuchen@huawei.com


   Yingjie Gu
   Huawei


   Phone:
   Fax:
   Email: guyingjie@huawei.com
   URI:


   Dacheng Zhang
   Huawei


   Phone:
   Fax:
   Email: zhangdacheng@huawei.com
   URI:











Wang, et al.              Expires June 22, 2013                 [Page 8]

