A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3530

        Title:      Network File System (NFS) version 4 Protocol
        Author(s):  S. Shepler, B. Callaghan, D. Robinson, R. Thurlow,
                    C. Beame, M. Eisler, D. Noveck
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       April 2003
        Mailbox:    spencer.shepler@sun.com, beame@bws.com,
                    brent.callaghan@sun.com, mike@eisler.com,
                    dnoveck@netapp.com, david.robinson@sun.com,
                    robert.thurlow@sun.com
        Pages:      275
        Characters: 600986
        Obsoletes:  3010

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-nfsv4-rfc3010bis-05.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3530.txt


The Network File System (NFS) version 4 is a distributed filesystem
protocol which owes heritage to NFS protocol version 2, RFC 1094, and
version 3, RFC 1813.  Unlike earlier versions, the NFS version 4
protocol supports traditional file access while integrating support
for file locking and the mount protocol.  In addition, support for
strong security (and its negotiation), compound operations, client
caching, and internationalization have been added.  Of course,
attention has been applied to making NFS version 4 operate well in an
Internet environment.

This document replaces RFC 3010 as the definition of the NFS version 4
protocol.

This document is a product of the Network File System Version 4
Working Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
