


PCP working group                                            S. Cheshire
Internet-Draft                                                     Apple
Intended status: Standards Track                             Feb 7, 2013
Expires: August 11, 2013


                          PCP Anycast Address
                     draft-cheshire-pcp-anycast-00

Abstract

   The Port Control Protocol Anycast Address enables PCP clients to
   transmit messages to their closest on-path NAT, Firewall, or other
   middlebox, without having to learn the IP address of that middlebox
   via some external channel.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 11, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.




Cheshire                 Expires August 11, 2013                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             PCP Anycast Address                  Feb 2013


1.  Introduction

   The Port Control Protocol document [PCP] specifies the message
   formats used, but the address to which a client sends its request is
   either assumed to be the default router (which is appropriate in a
   typical single-link residential network) or has to be configured
   otherwise via some external mechanism, such as DHCP.

   One drawback of relying on external configuration is that it creates
   an external dependency on another piece of network infrastructure
   which must be configured with the right address for PCP to work.  In
   some environments the staff managing the DHCP servers may not be the
   same staff managing the NAT gateways, and in any case, constantly
   keeping the DHCP server address information up to date as NAT
   gateways are added, removed, or reconfigured, is burdensome.  In
   addition DHCP clients would have to be updated to request the new
   "PCP Address" DHCP option, which for practical purposes limits this
   capability to operating system vendors, precluding creation of a pure
   user-level PCP library that can be linked with (and shipped) with an
   application that requires PCP.

   Another drawback of relying on DHCP for configuration is that one of
   the target deployment environments for PCP -- 3GPP for mobile
   telephones -- does not use DHCP.

   One design option that was considered for Apple's NAT gateways was to
   have the NAT gateway simply handle and respond to all packets
   addressed to UDP port 5351, regardless of the destination address in
   the packet.  Since the device is a NAT gateway, it already examines
   every packet in order to rewrite port numbers, so also detecting
   packets addressed to UDP port 5351 is not a significant additional
   burden.  Also, since this device is a NAT gateway which rewrites port
   numbers, any attempt by a client to talk *though* this first NAT
   gateway to create mappings in some second upstream NAT gateway is
   futile and pointless.  Any mappings created in the second NAT gateway
   are useful to the client only if there are also corresponding
   mappings created in the first NAT gateway.  Consequently, there is no
   case where it is useful for PCP requests to pass transparently
   through the first PCP-aware NAT gateway on their way to the second
   PCP-aware NAT gateway.  In all cases, for useful connectivity to be
   established, the PCP request must be handled by the first NAT
   gateway, and then the first NAT gateway generates a corresponding new
   upstream request to establish a mapping in the second NAT gateway.
   (This process can be repeated recursively for as many times as
   necessary for the depth of nesting of NAT gateways; this is
   transparent to the client device.)





Cheshire                 Expires August 11, 2013                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             PCP Anycast Address                  Feb 2013


   These two issues result in the following related observations: the
   PCP client may not *know* what destination address to use in its PCP
   request packets; the PCP server doesn't *care* what destination
   address is in the PCP request packets.

   Given that the devices neither need to know nor care what destination
   address goes in the packet, all we need to do is pick one and use it.
   It's little more than a placeholder in the IP header.  Any globally
   routable unicast address will do.  Since this address is one that
   automatically routes its packet to the closest on-path device that
   implements the desired functionality, it is an anycast address.

   In the simple case where the first-hop router is also the NAT gateway
   (as is common in a typical single-link residential network), sending
   to the PCP anycast address is equivalent to sending to the client's
   default router, as specified in the PCP base document [PCP].

   In the case of a larger corporate network, where there may be several
   internal routed subnets and one or more border NAT gateway(s)
   connecting to the rest of the Internet, sending to the PCP anycast
   address has the interesting property that it magically finds the
   right border NAT gateway for that client.  Since we posit that other
   network infrastructure does not need (and should not have) any
   special knowledge of PCP (or its anycast address) this means that to
   other non-NAT routers, the PCP anycast address will look like any
   other unicast destination address on the public Internet, and
   consequently the packet will be forwarded as for any other packet
   destined to the public Internet, until it reaches a NAT or firewall
   device that is aware of the PCP anycast address.  This will result in
   the packet naturally arriving the NAT gateway that handles this
   client's outbound traffic destined to the public Internet, which is
   exactly the NAT gateway that the client wishes to communicate with
   when managing its port mappings.


















Cheshire                 Expires August 11, 2013                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             PCP Anycast Address                  Feb 2013


2.  Benefit of using a PCP Anycast Address

   The benefit of using an anycast address is simplicity and
   reliability.  In an example deployment scenario:

   1.  A network administrator installs a PCP-capable NAT.

   2.  An end user (who may be the same person) runs a PCP-enabled
       application.  This application can implement PCP with purely
       user-level code -- no operating system support is required.

   3.  This PCP-enabled application sends its PCP request to the PCP
       anycast address.  This packet travels through the network like
       any other, without any special support from DNS, DHCP, other
       routers, or anything else, until it reaches the PCP-capable NAT,
       which receives it, handles it, and sends back a reply.

   Using the PCP anycast address, the only two things that need to be
   deployed in the network are the two things that actually use PCP: The
   PCP-capable NAT, and the PCP-enabled application.  Nothing else in
   the network needs to be changed or upgraded, and nothing needs to be
   configured, including the PCP client.


3.  Historical Objections to Anycast

   In March 2001 a draft document entitled "Analysis of DNS Server
   Discovery Mechanisms for IPv6" [DNSDisc] proposed using anycast to
   discover DNS servers, a proposal that was subsequently abandoned in
   later revisions of that draft document.

   There are legitimate reasons why using anycast to discover DNS
   servers is not compelling, mainly because it requires explicit
   configuration of routing tables to direct those anycast packets to
   the desired DNS server.  However, DNS server discovery is very
   different to NAT gateway discovery.  A DNS server is something a
   client explicitly talks to, via IP address.  The DNS server may be
   literally anywhere on the Internet.  Various reasons make anycast an
   uncompelling technique for DNS server discovery:

   o  DNS is a pure application-layer protocol, running over UDP.

   o  On an operating system without appropriate support for configuring
      anycast addresses, a DNS server would have to use something like
      Berkeley Packet Filter (BPF) to snoop on received packets to
      intercept DNS requests, which is inelegant and inefficient.





Cheshire                 Expires August 11, 2013                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             PCP Anycast Address                  Feb 2013


   o  Without appropriate routing changes elsewhere in the network,
      there's no reason to assume that packets sent to that anycast
      address would even make it to the desired DNS server machine.
      This places an addition configuration burden on the network
      administrators, to install approprate routing table entries to
      direct packets to the desired DNS server machine.

   In contrast, a NAT gateway is something a client's packets stumble
   across as they try to leave the local network and head out onto the
   public Internet.  The NAT gateway has to be on the path those packets
   naturally take or it can't perform its NAT functions.  As a result,
   the objections to using anycast for DNS server discovery do not apply
   to PCP:

   o  No routing changes are needed (or desired) elsewhere in the local
      network, because the whole *point* of using anycast is that we
      want the client's PCP request packet to take the same forwarding
      path through the network as a TCP SYN to any other remote
      destination address, because we want the *same* NAT gateway that
      would have made a mapping in response to receiving an outbound TCP
      SYN packet from the client to be the the one that makes a mapping
      in response to receiving a PCP request packet from the client.

   o  A NAT engine is already snooping on (and rewriting) every packet
      it forwards.  As part of that snooping it could trivially look for
      packets addressed to the PCP UDP port and process them locally
      (just like the local processing it already does when it sees an
      outbound TCP SYN packet).


4.  IANA Considerations

   IANA should allocate an IPv4 and an IPv6 well-known PCP anycast
   address.

   192.0.0.0/24 and 2001:0000::/23 are reserved for IETF Protocol
   Assignments, as listed at
   <http://www.iana.org/assignments/iana-ipv4-special-registry/> and
   <http://www.iana.org/assignments/iana-ipv6-special-registry/>

   Suitable addresses in these ranges, such as 192.0.0.8, and a
   corresponding suitable IPv6 address, should be allocated.









Cheshire                 Expires August 11, 2013                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             PCP Anycast Address                  Feb 2013


5.  Security Considerations

   In a network without any border gateway, NAT or firewall that is
   aware of the PCP anycast address, outgoing PCP requests could leak
   out onto the external Internet, possibly revealing information about
   internal devices.

   Using an IANA-assigned well-known PCP anycast address enables border
   gateways to block such outgoing packets.  In the default-free zone,
   routers should be configured to drop such packets.  Such
   configuration can occur naturally via BGP messages advertising that
   no route exists to said address.

   Sensitive clients that do not wish to leak information about their
   presesence can set an IP TTL on their PCP requests that limits how
   far they can travel into the public Internet.


6.  References

6.1.  Normative References

   [PCP]      Wing, D., Cheshire, S., Boucadair, M., Penno, R., and P.
              Selkirk, "Port Control Protocol (PCP)",
              draft-ietf-pcp-base-29 (work in progress), November 2012.

6.2.  Informative References

   [DNSDisc]  Hagino, J. and D. Thaler, "Analysis of DNS Server
              Discovery Mechanisms for IPv6",
              draft-ietf-ipngwg-dns-discovery-01 (work in progress),
              November 2001.


Author's Address

   Stuart Cheshire
   Apple Inc.
   1 Infinite Loop
   Cupertino, California  95014
   USA

   Phone: +1 408 974 3207
   Email: cheshire@apple.com







Cheshire                 Expires August 11, 2013                [Page 6]

