


PCP working group                                            S. Cheshire
Internet-Draft                                                     Apple
Intended status: Standards Track                            Mar 10, 2013
Expires: September 11, 2013


                             Recursive PCP
                    draft-cheshire-recursive-pcp-02

Abstract

   The Port Control Protocol (PCP) allows clients to request explicit
   dynamic inbound and outbound port mappings in their closest on-path
   NAT, firewall, or other middlebox.  However, in today's world, there
   may be more than one NAT on the path between a client and the public
   Internet.  This document describes how the closest on-path middlebox
   generates a corresponding upstream PCP request to the next closest
   on-path middlebox, to request an appropriate explicit dynamic port
   mapping in that middlebox too.  Applied recursively, this generates
   the necessary chain of port mappings in any number of middleboxes on
   the path between the client and the public Internet.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 11, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents



Cheshire               Expires September 11, 2013               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                Recursive PCP                     Mar 2013


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


1.  Introduction

   When NAT Port Mapping Protocol [NAT-PMP] was first created in 2004, a
   common network configuration was that a residential customer received
   a single public routable IPv4 address from their ISP, and had a
   single NAT gateway serving multiple computers in their home.
   Consequently, creating appropriate mappings in that single NAT
   gateway was sufficient to provide full Internet connectivity.

   In today's world, with public routable IPv4 addresses becoming less
   readily available, it is increasingly common for customers to receive
   a private address from their ISP, and the ISP uses a NAT gateway of
   its own to translate those packets before sending them out onto the
   public Internet.  This means that there is likely to be more than on
   NAT on the path between client machines and the public Internet:

   o  If a residential customer receives a translated address from their
      ISP, and then installs their own residential NAT gateway to share
      that address between multiple client devices in their home, then
      there are at least two NAT gateways on the path between client
      devices and the public Internet.

   o  If a mobile phone customer receives a translated address from
      their mobile phone carrier, and uses "Personal Hotspot" or
      "Internet Sharing" software on their mobile phone to make Wi-Fi
      Internet access available to other client devices, then there are
      at least two NAT gateways on the path between those client devices
      and the public Internet.

   o  If a hotel guest connects a portable Wi-Fi gateway, such as an
      Apple AirPort Express, to their hotel room Ethernet port to share
      their room's Internet connection between their phone, their iPad,
      and their laptop computer, then packets from the client devices
      may traverse the hotel guest's portable NAT, the hotel network's
      NAT, and the ISP's NAT before reaching the public Internet.

   While it is possible, in theory, that client devices could somehow
   discover all the NATs on the path, and communicate with each one
   separately using Port Control Protocol [PCP] (NAT-PMP's IETF
   Standards Track successor), in practice it's not clear how client
   devices would reliably learn this information.  Since the NAT



Cheshire               Expires September 11, 2013               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                Recursive PCP                     Mar 2013


   gateways are installed and operated by different individuals and
   organizations, no single entity has knowledge of all the NATs on the
   path.  Also, even if a client device could somehow know all the NATs
   on the path, requiring a client device to communicate separately with
   all of them imposes unreasonable complexity on PCP clients, many of
   which are expected to be simple low-cost devices.

   In addition, this goes against the spirit of NAT gateways.  The main
   purpose of a NAT gateway is to make multiple downstream client
   devices making outgoing TCP connections to appear, from the point of
   view of everything upstream of the NAT gateway, to be a single client
   device making outgoing TCP connections.  In the same spirit, it makes
   sense for a PCP-capable NAT gateway to make multiple downstream
   client devices requesting port mappings to appear, from the point of
   view of everything upstream of the NAT gateway, to be a single client
   device requesting port mappings.

   This document specifies how a PCP-capable NAT gateway uses Recursive
   PCP to create the appearance of being a single device, from the point
   of view of the upstream network.

1.1.  Conventions and Terminology Used in this Document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in "Key words for use in
   RFCs to Indicate Requirement Levels" [RFC2119].

   Where this document uses the terms "upstream" and "downstream", the
   term "upstream" refers to the direction outbound packets travel
   towards the public Internet, and the term "downstream" refers to the
   direction inbound packets travel from the public Internet towards
   client systems.  Typically when a home user views a web site, their
   computer sends an outbound TCP SYN packet upstream towards the public
   Internet, and an inbound downstream TCP SYN ACK reply comes back from
   the public Internet.

1.2.  Recursive Application

   The protocol specified is described as "recursive" because of the
   following properties:

   o  When the text refers to the upstream PCP server as if it were the
      final outermost NAT gateway, in fact that upstream PCP server
      could itself be another Recursive PCP server making requests to
      its own upstream PCP server, and relaying back the corresponding
      replies.  That distinction is invisible to the PCP client making
      the request.



Cheshire               Expires September 11, 2013               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                Recursive PCP                     Mar 2013


   o  When the text refers to an incoming PCP request being received
      from a downstream PCP client, that downstream PCP client could
      itself be a Recursive PCP server relaying a request on behalf of
      one of its own downstream PCP clients (which could itself be
      another Recursive PCP server, and so on).  The fact that the
      Recursive PCP server receiving the request does not need to be
      aware of this or take any special action, is an important
      simplifying property of the protocol.  The purpose of a NAT
      gateway is to make many downstream client devices appear to be a
      single client device, and the purpose of a Recursive PCP server is
      to make many downstream client devices making PCP requests appear
      to be a single client device making PCP requests.

   This recursive operation is an important simplifying property of the
   design.

   When a PCP client talks to a PCP server, that PCP server behaves
   *exactly* as if it were the one and only NAT gateway on the path to
   the public Internet.  If the PCP server is not in fact the final
   outermost NAT gateway, it is the PCP server's responsibility to hide
   that fact.  The client should never have to be aware of the
   difference between talking to a single NAT gateway, and talking to a
   NAT gateway which is itself behind one or more other NAT gateways.
   This simplifying property applies both when the PCP client is a
   simple end-host client, and when the PCP client is itself the client
   face of a Recursive PCP server.

   Similarly, when a PCP server receives a request from a PCP client,
   that PCP client behaves exactly as if it were a simple end-host PCP
   client requesting mappings for itself.  If the client is not in fact
   a simple end-host PCP client, it is the PCP client's responsibility
   to hide that fact.  The server should never have to be aware of the
   difference between talking to an end-host PCP client, and talking to
   the client face of a Recursive PCP server that is requesting mappings
   on behalf of its own downstream clients.  If the PCP client is a
   firewall device, and it chooses to use the PCP THIRD_PARTY Option to
   make mappings on behalf of its downstream clients, then it should
   still behave like any other PCP client using the THIRD_PARTY Option.


2.  Operation of Recursive PCP

   Upon receipt of a PCP mapping-creation request from a downstream PCP
   client, a Recursive PCP server first examines its local mapping table
   to see if it already has a valid active mapping matching the Internal
   Address and Internal Port (and in the case of PEER requests, remote
   peer) given in the request.




Cheshire               Expires September 11, 2013               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                Recursive PCP                     Mar 2013


   If the Recursive PCP server does not already have a valid active
   mapping for this mapping-creation request, then it allocates an
   available port on its external interface.  We assume for the sake of
   this description that the address of its external interface is itself
   a private address, subject to translation by an upstream NAT.  The
   Recursive PCP server then constructs an appropriate corresponding PCP
   request of its own (described below), and sends it to its upstream
   NAT, and the newly-created local mapping is considered temporary
   until a confirming reply is received from the upstream PCP server.

   If the Recursive PCP server does already have a valid active mapping
   for this mapping-creation request, and the lifetime remaining on the
   local mapping is at least 3/4 of the lifetime requested by the PCP
   client, then the Recursive PCP server SHOULD send an immediate reply
   giving the outermost External Address and Port (previously learned
   using Recursive PCP, as described below), and the actual lifetime
   remaining for this mapping.  If the lifetime remaining on the local
   mapping is less than 3/4 of the lifetime requested by the PCP client,
   then the Recursive PCP server MUST generate an upstream request as
   described below.

   For mapping-deletion requests (Lifetime = 0), the local mapping, if
   any, is deleted, and then (regardless of whether a local mapping
   existed) a corresponding upstream request is generated.

   How the Recursive PCP server knows the destination IP address for its
   upstream PCP request is outside the scope of this document, but this
   may be achieved in a zero-configuration manner using PCP Anycast
   [Anycast].  In the upstream PCP request:

   o  The PCP Client's IP Address and Internal Port are the Recursive
      PCP server's own external address and port just allocated for this
      mapping.

   o  The Suggested External Address and Port in the upstream PCP
      request SHOULD be copied from the original PCP request.

   o  The Requested Lifetime is as requested by the client if it falls
      within the acceptable range for this PCP server; otherwise it
      SHOULD be capped to appropriate minimum and maximum values
      configured for this PCP server.

   o  The Mapping Nonce is copied from the original PCP request.

   o  For PEER requests, the Remote Peer IP Address and Port are copied
      from the original PCP request.





Cheshire               Expires September 11, 2013               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                Recursive PCP                     Mar 2013


   o  Any options in the original PCP request are handled or rejected
      locally.  No options are blindly copied from the original PCP
      request to the upstream PCP request.  Options in the original PCP
      request pertain to the transaction between the client and its
      Recursive PCP server.  In the new upstream PCP request PCP options
      may also be used if necessary to create the desired mapping, but
      they are best thought of as new options pertaining to the
      transaction between the Recursive PCP server and its upstream PCP
      server, rather than as pre-existing options that were "copied"
      from the original PCP request (even if, in some cases, the content
      of those new options may be similar or identical to the options in
      the original PCP request).

   Upon receipt of a PCP reply giving the outermost (i.e. publicly
   routable) External Address, Port and Lifetime, the Recursive PCP
   server records this information in its own mapping table and relays
   the information to the requesting downstream PCP client in a PCP
   reply.  The Recursive PCP server therefore records, among other
   things, the following information in its mapping table:

   o  Client's Internal Address and Port.

   o  External Address and Port allocated by this Recursive PCP server.

   o  Outermost External Address and Port allocated by the upstream PCP
      server.

   o  Mapping lifetime (also dictated by the upstream PCP server).

   o  Mapping nonce.

   In the downstream PCP reply:

   o  The Lifetime is as granted by the upstream PCP server, or less, if
      the granted lifetime exceeds the maximum lifetime this PCP server
      is configured to grant.  If the downstream Lifetime is more than
      the Lifetime granted by the upstream PCP server (which is NOT
      RECOMMENDED) then this Recursive PCP server MUST take
      responsibility for renewing the upstream mapping itself.

   o  The Epoch Time is *this* Recursive PCP server's Epoch Time, not
      the Epoch Time of the upstream PCP server.  Each PCP server has
      its own independent Epoch Time.  However, if the Epoch Time
      received from the upstream PCP server indicates a loss of state in
      that PCP server, the Recursive PCP server can either recreate the
      lost mappings itself, or it can reset its own Epoch Time to cause
      its downstream clients to perform such state repairs themselves.
      A Recursive PCP server MUST NOT simply copy the upstream PCP



Cheshire               Expires September 11, 2013               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                Recursive PCP                     Mar 2013


      server's Epoch Time into its downstream PCP replies, since if it
      suffers its own state loss it needs the ability to communicate
      that state loss to clients.  Thus each PCP server has its own
      independent Epoch Time.  However, as a convenience, a downstream
      Recursive PCP server may simply choose to reset its own Epoch Time
      whenever it detects that its upstream PCP server has lost state.
      Thus, in this case, the Recursive PCP server's Epoch Time always
      resets whenever its upstream PCP server loses state; it may also
      reset at other times too.

   o  The Mapping Nonce is copied from the reply received from the
      upstream PCP server.

   o  The Assigned External Port and Assigned External IP Address are
      copied from the reply received from the upstream PCP server.
      (I.e. they are the outermost External IP Address and Port, not the
      locally-assigned external address and port.)

   o  For PEER requests, the Remote Peer IP Address and Port are copied
      from the reply received from the upstream PCP server.

   o  Any options in the reply received from the upstream PCP server are
      handled locally as appropriate to the options in question.  No
      options are blindly copied from the upstream PCP reply to the
      downstream PCP reply.  If the original PCP request contained
      options which necessitate a corresponding option in the reply,
      then appropriate reply options should be generated and inserted
      into the downstream PCP reply by the Recursive PCP server.  These
      downstream reply options are best thought of as data pertaining to
      the transaction between the Recursive PCP server and its
      downstream client, rather than as pre-existing options that were
      "copied" from the upstream PCP reply into the downstream PCP reply
      (even if, in some cases, the content of those new options in the
      downstream PCP reply may be similar or identical to the options
      received in the reply from the upstream PCP server).

2.1.  Optimized Hairpin Routing

   A Recursive PCP server SHOULD implement Optimized Hairpin Routing.
   What this means is the following:

   o  If a Recursive PCP server observes an outgoing packet arriving on
      its internal interface that is addressed to an External Address
      and Port appearing in the NAT gateway's own mapping table, then
      the NAT gateway SHOULD (after creating a new outbound mapping if
      one does not already exist) rewrite the packet appropriately and
      deliver it to the internal client currently allocated that
      External Address and Port.



Cheshire               Expires September 11, 2013               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                Recursive PCP                     Mar 2013


   o  If a Recursive PCP server observes an outgoing packet arriving on
      its internal interface which is addressed to an Outermost External
      Address and Port appearing in the NAT gateway's own mapping table,
      then the NAT gateway SHOULD do likewise: create a new outbound
      mapping if one does not already exist, and then rewrite the packet
      appropriately and deliver it to the internal client currently
      allocated that Outermost External Address and Port.  This is not
      necessary for successful communication, but for efficiency.
      Without this Optimized Hairpin Routing, the packet will be
      delivered all the way to the outermost NAT gateway, which will
      then perform standard hairpin translation and send it back.  Using
      knowledge of the Outermost External Address and Port, this
      rewriting can be anticipated and performed locally, which will
      typically offer higher throughput and lower latency than sending
      it all the way to the outermost NAT gateway and back.

2.2.  Termination of Recursion

   Any recursive algorithm needs a mechanism to terminate the recursion
   at the appropriate point.  This termination of recursion can be
   achieved in a variety of ways:

   o  An ISP's NAT gateway could be configured to know that it is the
      outermost NAT gateway, and consequently does not need to relay PCP
      requests upstream.  In fact, it may be the case that many large-
      scale NATs of the kind used by ISPs may simply not implement
      Recursive PCP, thereby naturally terminating the recursion at that
      point.

   o  A NAT gateway could determine automatically that if its external
      address is not one of the known private addresses
      [RFC1918][RFC6598] then its external address is a public routable
      IP address, and consequently it does not need to relay PCP
      requests upstream.

   o  A NAT gateway could attempt sending PCP requests upstream, and
      upon failing to receive any positive reply (e.g. receiving ICMP
      host unreachable, ICMP port unreachable, or a timeout) conclude
      that it does not need to relay PCP requests upstream.

2.3.  Recursive PCP with Firewalls

   When a Recursive PCP server is a NAT gateway, it sends out upstream
   PCP requests using its own external IP address.  When a Recursive PCP
   server is a firewall, it still needs to install upstream mappings on
   behalf of its downstream clients.  It should do this either by using
   the downstream client's IP address as the source IP address in its
   upstream PCP request, or by using the PCP THIRD_PARTY Option in its



Cheshire               Expires September 11, 2013               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                Recursive PCP                     Mar 2013


   upstream PCP request.


3.  IANA Considerations

   No IANA actions are required by this document.


4.  Security Considerations

   No new security concerns are raised by use of Recursive PCP.  Since
   the purpose of a NAT gateway is to enable multiple client devices to
   appear as a single client device to the upstream network, a NAT
   gateway implementing Recursive PCP maintains this property, appearing
   to the upstream network to be a single client device using PCP to
   request port mappings for itself.  Whether those port mappings are
   for multiple processes running on multiple CPUs connected via an
   internal bus in a single computer, or multiple processes running on
   multiple CPUs connected via an IP network, is transparent to the
   external network.


5.  References

5.1.  Normative References

   [PCP]      Wing, D., Cheshire, S., Boucadair, M., Penno, R., and P.
              Selkirk, "Port Control Protocol (PCP)",
              draft-ietf-pcp-base-29 (work in progress), November 2012.

   [RFC1918]  Rekhter, Y., Moskowitz, R., Karrenberg, D., Groot, G., and
              E. Lear, "Address Allocation for Private Internets",
              BCP 5, RFC 1918, February 1996.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC6598]  Weil, J., Kuarsingh, V., Donley, C., Liljenstolpe, C., and
              M. Azinger, "IANA-Reserved IPv4 Prefix for Shared Address
              Space", BCP 153, RFC 6598, April 2012.

5.2.  Informative References

   [Anycast]  Cheshire, S., "PCP Anycast Address",
              draft-cheshire-pcp-anycast-00 (work in progress),
              February 2013.

   [NAT-PMP]  Cheshire, S., "NAT Port Mapping Protocol (NAT-PMP)",



Cheshire               Expires September 11, 2013               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                Recursive PCP                     Mar 2013


              draft-cheshire-nat-pmp-07 (work in progress),
              January 2013.


Author's Address

   Stuart Cheshire
   Apple Inc.
   1 Infinite Loop
   Cupertino, California  95014
   USA

   Phone: +1 408 974 3207
   Email: cheshire@apple.com





































Cheshire               Expires September 11, 2013              [Page 10]

