


Network Working Group                                     S. Kiesel, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                   University of Stuttgart
Intended status: Informational                                S. Previdi
Expires: April 28, 2011                              Cisco Systems, Inc.
                                                          M. Stiemerling
                                                         NEC Europe Ltd.
                                                               R. Woundy
                                                     Comcast Corporation
                                                               Y R. Yang
                                                         Yale University
                                                        October 25, 2010


       Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO) Requirements
                      draft-ietf-alto-reqs-06.txt

Abstract

   Many Internet applications are used to access resources, such as
   pieces of information or server processes, which are available in
   several equivalent replicas on different hosts.  This includes, but
   is not limited to, peer-to-peer file sharing applications.  The goal
   of Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO) is to provide
   guidance to applications, which have to select one or several hosts
   from a set of candidates, that are able to provide a desired
   resource.  This guidance shall be based on parameters that affect
   performance and efficiency of the data transmission between the
   hosts, e.g., the topological distance.  The ultimate goal is to
   improve performance (or Quality of Experience) in the application
   while reducing resource consumption in the underlying network
   infrastructure.

   This document enumerates requirements for ALTO, which should be
   considered when specifying, assessing, or comparing protocols and
   implementations, and it solicits feedback and discussion.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any



Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 28, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.


























Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Terminology and Architectural Framework  . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.1.  Requirements Notation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.2.  ALTO Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.3.  Architectural Framework for ALTO . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.4.  Sample Use Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   3.  ALTO Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     3.1.  ALTO Client Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       3.1.1.  General Requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       3.1.2.  Host Group Descriptor Support  . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       3.1.3.  Rating Criteria Support  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       3.1.4.  Placement of Entities and Timing of Transactions . . . 11
       3.1.5.  Protocol Extensibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       3.1.6.  Error Handling and Overload Protection . . . . . . . . 13
     3.2.  ALTO Server Discovery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     3.3.  Security and Privacy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   4.  Host Group Descriptors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   5.  Rating Criteria  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     5.1.  Distance-related Rating Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     5.2.  Charging-related Rating Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     5.3.  Performance-related Rating Criteria  . . . . . . . . . . . 18
     5.4.  Inappropriate Rating Criteria  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     7.1.  High-level security considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
     7.2.  Classification of Information Disclosure Scenarios . . . . 21
     7.3.  Security Requirements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   8.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
     8.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
     8.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
   Appendix A.  Contributors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
   Appendix B.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
















Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


1.  Introduction

   The motivation for Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO) is
   described in the ALTO problem statement [RFC5693].

   The goal of ALTO is to provide information which can help peer-to-
   peer (P2P) applications to make better decisions with respect to peer
   selection.  However, ALTO may be useful for non-P2P applications as
   well.  For example, clients of client-server applications may use
   information provided by ALTO to select one of several servers or
   information replicas.  As another example, ALTO information could be
   used to select a media relay needed for NAT traversal.  The goal of
   these informed decisions is to improve performance (or Quality of
   Experience) in the application while reducing resource consumption in
   the underlying network infrastructure.

   Usually, it would be difficult or even impossible for application
   entities to acquire this information by other mechanisms (e.g., using
   measurements between the peers of a P2P overlay), because of
   complexity or because it is based on network topology information,
   network operational costs, or network policies, which the respective
   network provider does not want to disclose in detail.

   The logical entities that provide the ALTO service do not take part
   in the actual user data transport, i.e., they do not implement
   functions for relaying user data.  They may be placed on various
   kinds of physical nodes, e.g., on dedicated servers, as auxiliary
   processes in routers, on "trackers" or "super peers" of a P2P
   application operated by the network provider, etc.






















Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


2.  Terminology and Architectural Framework

2.1.  Requirements Notation

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

2.2.  ALTO Terminology

   This document uses the following ALTO-related terms, which are
   defined in [RFC5693]:

   Application, Overlay Network, Application protocol, Peer, P2P,
   Resource, Resource Identifier, Resource Provider, Resource Consumer,
   Resource Directory, Transport Address, ALTO Service, ALTO Server,
   ALTO Client, ALTO Client Protocol, ALTO Query, ALTO Reply, ALTO
   Transaction, Provisioning protocol, Inter ALTO-Server Protocol, Local
   Traffic, Peering Traffic, Transit Traffic.

   Furthermore, the following additional terms will be used:

   o  Host Group Descriptor: Information used to describe the resource
      consumer which seeks ALTO guidance, or one or several candidate
      resource providers.  This can be, for example, a single IP
      address, an address prefix or address range that contains the
      host(s), or an autonomous system (AS) number.  Different options
      may provide different levels of detail.  Depending on the system
      architecture, this may have implications on the quality of the
      guidance ALTO is able to provide, on whether recommendations can
      be aggregated, and on how much privacy-sensitive information about
      users might be disclosed to additional parties.  For a discussion,
      see Section 4.

   o  Host Characteristics Attribute: Properties of a host (other than
      the host group descriptor), in particular related to its
      attachment to the network.  This information may be stored in the
      ALTO server and transmitted in the ALTO protocol.  It may be
      evaluated according to the rating criteria.

   o  Rating Criterion: The condition or relation that defines the
      "better" in "better-than-random peer selection", which is the
      ultimate goal of ALTO.  Examples may include "host's Internet
      access is not subject to volume based charging (flat rate)" or
      "low topological distance".  Some rating criteria, such as "low
      topological distance", need to include a reference point, i. e.,
      "low topological distance from a given resource consumer", which
      can be described by means of a host group descriptor.



Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


2.3.  Architectural Framework for ALTO

   There are various architectural options how ALTO could be
   implemented, and specifying or mandating one specific architecture is
   out of the scope of this document.

   The ALTO Working Group Charter [ALTO-charter] itemizes several key
   components, which shall be elaborated and specified by the ALTO
   Working Group.  The ALTO problem statement [RFC5693] defines a
   terminology (see Section 2.2) and presents a figure that gives a
   high-level overview of protocol interaction between ALTO elements.

   This document itemizes requirements for the following components of
   the abovementioned architecture:

   o  The ALTO client protocol, which is used for sending ALTO queries
      and ALTO replies between ALTO client and ALTO server.

   o  The discovery mechanism, which will be used by ALTO clients in
      order to find out where to send ALTO requests.

   o  The overall architecture, especially with respect to security and
      privacy issues.

   Furthermore, this document describes the following data structures,
   which might be used in the ALTO client protocol:

   o  Host group descriptors, which are used to describe the location of
      a host in the network topology.

   o  Rating criteria, i. e., conditions that shall be evaluated in
      order to generate the ALTO guidance.

   Requirements regarding other components are not considered in the
   current version of this document, but may be added later.

2.4.  Sample Use Cases

   The ALTO problem statement [RFC5693] presents a figure that gives a
   high-level overview of protocol interaction between ALTO elements.
   The following figures are somewhat more elaborated and extended
   versions of it, in order to give some non-normative examples of ALTO
   usage.  It can also be seen that, in some use cases, some of the
   requirements presented in later sections are more relevant than in
   others.

   Figure 1 shows an ALTO use case with a DHT-based P2P application.
   Using this distributed lookup mechanism, a peer can figure out which



Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


   other peers are candidate resource providers for a desired resource.
   Every peer software includes an ALTO client, in order to request and
   receive guidance on peer selection from the ALTO servers.

   From an ALTO perspective this means that the ALTO servers will
   receive ALTO queries from a rather large number of different ALTO
   clients.  The performance of many clients and their Internet
   connectivity may be rather limited and therefore, this puts certain
   restrictions on the amount of guiding data that can be sent to them.
   Furthermore, the privacy-sensitive IP addresses of the peers are
   visible to the (operators of the) ALTO servers, as these are also the
   source addresses of the ALTO query messages.

   Figure 2 shows an ALTO use case with a P2P application that makes use
   of a centralized resource directory (in some specific P2P
   implementations called a "tracker").  In this scenario the ALTO
   servers receive queries only from few entities, i.e., the resource
   directories.  As these resource directories must be powerful machines
   anyway, it may be reasonable to send large amounts of ALTO guidance
   data to them, which will be cached there.  Furthermore, in this
   scenario it may be possible to hide the exact addresses of the peers
   from the ALTO server.


                                               +-----+
                                          =====|     |**
                                      ====     +-----+  *
                                  ====            *     *
                              ====                *     *
     +-----+     +------+=====                 +-----+  *
     |     |.....|      |======================|     |  *
     +-----+     +------+=====                 +-----+  *
   Source of      ALTO        ====                *     *
   topological    service         ====            *     *
   information                        ====     +-----+  *
                                          =====|     |**
                                               +-----+
   Legend:
   === ALTO client protocol
   *** Application protocol
   ... Provisioning protocol

     Figure 1: Overview of protocol interaction between ALTO elements,
                    scenario without resource directory







Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


                                               +-----+
                                             **|     |**
                                           **  +-----+  *
                                         **       *     *
                                       **         *     *
     +-----+     +------+     +-----+**        +-----+  *
     |     |.....|      |=====|     |**********|     |  *
     +-----+     +------+     +-----+**        +-----+  *
   Source of      ALTO        Resource **         *     *
   topological    service     directory  **       *     *
   information               ("tracker")   **  +-----+  *
                                             **|     |**
                                               +-----+
                                                Peers
   Legend:
   === ALTO client protocol
   *** Application protocol
   ... Provisioning protocol

     Figure 2: Overview of protocol interaction between ALTO elements,
                     scenario with resource directory






























Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


3.  ALTO Requirements

3.1.  ALTO Client Protocol

3.1.1.  General Requirements

   REQ.  ARv06-1: The ALTO service is provided by one or more ALTO
   servers.  ALTO servers MUST implement the ALTO client protocol, for
   receiving ALTO queries from ALTO clients and for sending the
   corresponding ALTO replies.

   REQ.  ARv06-2: ALTO clients MUST implement the ALTO client protocol,
   for sending ALTO queries to ALTO servers and for receiving the
   corresponding ALTO replies.

   REQ.  ARv06-3: The format of the ALTO query message MUST allow the
   ALTO client to solicit guidance for selecting appropriate resource
   providers.

   REQ.  ARv06-4: The format of the ALTO reply message MUST allow the
   ALTO server to express its guidance for selecting appropriate
   resource providers.

   REQ.  ARv06-5: The detailed specification of a protocol is out of the
   scope of this document.  However, any protocol specification that
   claims to implement the ALTO client protocol MUST be compliant to the
   requirements itemized in this document.

3.1.2.  Host Group Descriptor Support

   The ALTO guidance is based on the evaluation of several resource
   providers or groups of resource providers, which are characterized by
   means of host group descriptors, considering one or several rating
   criteria.

   REQ.  ARv06-6: The ALTO client protocol MUST support the usage of
   several different host group descriptor types.

   REQ.  ARv06-7: The ALTO client protocol specification MUST define a
   basic set of host group descriptor types, which MUST be supported by
   all implementations of the ALTO client protocol.

   REQ.  ARv06-8: The ALTO client protocol MUST support the host group
   descriptor types "IPv4 address prefix" and "IPv6 address prefix."
   They can be used to specify the IP address of one host, or an IP
   address range (in CIDR notation), which contains all hosts in
   question.  It is also possible to specify a broader address range
   (i.e., a shorter prefix length) than the intended group of hosts



Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


   actually uses, in order to conceal their exact identity.

   REQ.  ARv06-9: The ALTO client protocol specification MUST define an
   appropriate procedure for adding new host group descriptor types,
   e.g., by establishing an IANA registry.

   See Section 4 for a discussion of possible other host group
   descriptor types.

   REQ.  ARv06-10: ALTO clients and ALTO servers MUST clearly identify
   the type of each host group descriptor sent in ALTO queries or
   replies.

   REQ.  ARv06-11: For host group descriptor types other than "IPv4
   address prefix" and "IPv6 address prefix", the host group descriptor
   type identification MUST be supplemented by a reference to a
   facility, which can be used to translate host group descriptors of
   that type to IPv4/IPv6 address prefixes, e.g., by means of a mapping
   table or an algorithm.

   REQ.  ARv06-12: Protocol functions for mapping other host group
   descriptor types to IPv4/IPv6 address prefixes SHOULD be designed and
   specified as part of the ALTO client protocol, and the corresponding
   address mapping information SHOULD be made available by the same
   entity that wants to use these host group descriptors within the ALTO
   client protocol.  However, an ALTO server or an ALTO client MAY also
   send a reference to an external mapping facility, e.g., a translation
   table to be downloaded as file via HTTP.

   REQ.  ARv06-13: The ALTO client protocol specification MUST define
   mechanisms, which can be used by the ALTO client and the ALTO server
   to indicate that a host group descriptor used by the other party is
   of an unsupported type, or that the indicated mapping mechanism could
   not be used.

3.1.3.  Rating Criteria Support

   REQ.  ARv06-14: The ALTO client protocol MUST support the usage of
   several different rating criteria types.

   REQ.  ARv06-15: The ALTO client protocol specification MUST define a
   basic set of rating criteria types, which MUST be supported by all
   implementations of the ALTO client protocol.

   REQ.  ARv06-16: The ALTO client protocol specification MUST support
   the rating criteria type "relative operator's preference."  This is a
   relative measure, i.e., it is not associated with any unit of
   measurement.  A higher rating according to this criterion indicates



Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


   that the application should prefer the respective candidate resource
   provider over others with lower ratings (if no other reasons speak
   against it, such as transmission attempts suggesting that the path is
   currently congested).  The operator of the ALTO server does not have
   to disclose how and based on which data the ratings are actually
   computed.  Examples could be: cost for peering or transit traffic,
   traffic engineering inside the network, and other policies.

   REQ.  ARv06-17: The ALTO client protocol specification MUST define an
   appropriate procedure for adding new rating criteria types, e.g., by
   establishing an IANA registry.

   See Section 5 for a discussion of possible other rating criteria.

   REQ.  ARv06-18:The ALTO query message SHOULD allow the ALTO client to
   express which rating criteria should be considered, as well as their
   relative relevance for the specific application that will eventually
   make use of the guidance.

   REQ.  ARv06-19:The ALTO reply message SHOULD allow the ALTO server to
   express which rating criteria have been considered when generating
   the reply.

   REQ.  ARv06-20: The ALTO client protocol specification MUST define
   mechanisms, which can be used by the ALTO client and the ALTO server
   to indicate that a rating criteria used by the other party is of an
   unsupported type.

3.1.4.  Placement of Entities and Timing of Transactions

   With respect to the placement of ALTO clients, several modes of
   operation exist:

   o  One mode of ALTO operation is that ALTO clients may be embedded
      directly in the resource consumer (e.g., peer of a DHT-based P2P
      application), which wants to access a resource.

   o  Another mode of operation is to perform ALTO queries indirectly,
      via resource directories (e.g., tracker of a P2P application),
      which may issue ALTO queries to solicit preference on potential
      resource providers, considering the respective resource consumer.

   REQ.  ARv06-21: The ALTO client protocol MUST support the mode of
   operation, in which the ALTO client is directly embedded in the
   resource consumer.

   REQ.  ARv06-22: The ALTO client protocol MUST support the mode of
   operation, in which the ALTO client is embedded in the resource



Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


   directory.

   REQ.  ARv06-23: The ALTO client protocol MUST be designed in a way
   that the ALTO service can be provided by an entity which is not the
   operator of the IP access network.

   REQ.  ARv06-24: The ALTO client protocol MUST be designed in a way
   that different instances of the ALTO service operated by different
   providers can coexist.

   With respect to the timing of ALTO queries, several modes of
   operation exist:

   o  In target-aware query mode, an ALTO client performs the ALTO query
      when the desired resource and a set of candidate resource
      providers are already known, i. e., after DHT lookups, queries to
      the resource directory, etc.

   o  In target-independent query mode, ALTO queries are performed in
      advance or periodically, in order to receive comprehensive,
      "target-independent" guidance, which will be cached locally and
      evaluated later, when a resource is to be accessed.

   REQ.  ARv06-25: The ALTO client protocol MUST support at least one of
   these two modes, either the target-aware or the target-independent
   query mode.

   REQ.  ARv06-26: The ALTO client protocol SHOULD support both the
   target-aware and the target-independent query mode.

   REQ.  ARv06-27: The ALTO client protocol SHOULD support lifetime
   attributes, to enable caching of recommendations at ALTO clients.

   REQ.  ARv06-28: The ALTO client protocol SHOULD specify an aging
   mechanism, which allows to give newer recommendations precedence over
   older ones.

   REQ.  ARv06-30: The ALTO client protocol SHOULD allow the ALTO server
   to add information about appropriate modes of re-use to its ALTO
   replies.  Re-use may include redistributing an ALTO reply to other
   parties, as well as using the same ALTO information in a resource
   directory to improve the replies to different resource consumers,
   within the specified lifetime of the ALTO reply.  The ALTO server
   SHOULD be able to express that

   o  no re-use should occur





Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


   o  re-use is appropriate for a specific "target audience", i.e., a
      set of resource consumers explicitly defined by a list of host
      group descriptors.  The ALTO server MAY specify a "target
      audience" in the ALTO reply, which is only a subset of the known
      actual "target audience", e.g., if required by operator policies

   o  re-use is appropriate for any resource consumer that would send
      (or cause a third party sending on behalf of it) the same ALTO
      query (i.e., with the same query parameters, except for the
      resource consumer ID, if applicable) to this ALTO server

   o  re-use is appropriate for any resource consumer that would send
      (or cause a third party sending on behalf of it) the same ALTO
      query (i.e., with the same query parameters, except for the
      resource consumer ID, if applicable) to any ALTO server

   REQ.  ARv06-31: The ALTO client protocol MUST support scenarios with
   the ALTO client located in the private address realm behind a network
   address translator (NAT).  There are different types of NAT, see
   [RFC4787] and [RFC5382].

3.1.5.  Protocol Extensibility

   REQ.  ARv06-32: The ALTO client protocol MUST include support for
   adding protocol extensions in a non-disruptive, backward-compatible
   way.

   REQ.  ARv06-33: The ALTO client protocol MUST include protocol
   versioning support, in order to clearly distinguish between
   incompatible versions of the protocol.

3.1.6.  Error Handling and Overload Protection

   REQ.  ARv06-34: Any application designed to use ALTO MUST also work
   if no ALTO servers can be found or if no responses to ALTO queries
   are received, e.g., due to connectivity problems or overload
   situation.

   REQ.  ARv06-35: The ALTO client protocol MUST use TCP based
   transport.

   REQ.  ARv06-36: An ALTO server, which is operating close to its
   capacity limit, MUST be able to inform clients about its impending
   overload situation, and require them to throttle their query rate.

   REQ.  ARv06-37: An ALTO server, which is operating close to its
   capacity limit, MUST be able to inform clients about its impending
   overload situation, and redirect them to another ALTO server.



Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


   REQ.  ARv06-38: An ALTO server, which is operating close to its
   capacity limit, MUST be able to inform clients about its impending
   overload situation, and terminate the conversation with the ALTO
   client.

   REQ.  ARv06-39: An ALTO server, which is operating close to its
   capacity limit, MUST be able to inform clients about its impending
   overload situation, and reject new conversation attempts.

3.2.  ALTO Server Discovery

   The ALTO client protocol is supported by one or several ALTO server
   discovery mechanisms, which will be used by ALTO clients in order to
   find out where to send ALTO requests.

   REQ.  ARv06-40: ALTO clients which are embedded in the resource
   consumer MUST be able to use the ALTO server discovery mechanism, in
   order to find one or several ALTO servers that can provide ALTO
   guidance suitable for the resource consumer.  This mode of operation
   is called "resource consumer initiated ALTO server discovery".

   REQ.  ARv06-41: ALTO clients which are embedded in a resource
   directory and perform third-party ALTO queries on behalf of a remote
   resource consumer MUST be able to use the ALTO server discovery
   mechanism, in order to find one or several ALTO servers that can
   provide ALTO guidance suitable for the respective resource consumer.
   This mode of operation is called "third-party ALTO server discovery".

   REQ.  ARv06-42: ALTO clients MUST be able to perform resource
   consumer initiated ALTO server discovery, even if they are located
   behind a network address translator (NAT).

   REQ.  ARv06-43: ALTO clients MUST be able to perform third-party ALTO
   server discovery, even if they are located behind a network address
   translator (NAT).

   REQ.  ARv06-44: ALTO clients MUST be able to perform third-party ALTO
   server discovery, even if the resource consumer, on behalf of which
   the ALTO query will be sent, is located behind a network address
   translator (NAT).

   REQ.  ARv06-45: The ALTO server discovery mechanism may be specified
   and provided using an existing protocol or mechanism, such as DNS,
   DHCP, or PPP based automatic configuration, etc.  These candidate
   "base protocols" differ with respect to their availability in various
   access network architectures and their suitability for third-party
   queries.  When evaluating different options this should be taken into
   account, in order to limit the total number of ALTO server discovery



Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


   mechanisms that have to be specified for supporting a reasonably wide
   range of deployment scenarios.

   REQ.  ARv06-46: The ALTO server discovery mechanism SHOULD be able to
   return the respective contact information for several ALTO servers.

   REQ.  ARv06-47: The ALTO server discovery mechanism SHOULD be able to
   indicate preferences for each returned ALTO server contact
   information.

3.3.  Security and Privacy

   REQ.  ARv06-48: The ALTO client protocol MUST support mechanisms for
   the authentication of ALTO servers.

   REQ.  ARv06-49: The ALTO client protocol MUST support mechanisms for
   the authentication of ALTO clients.

   REQ.  ARv06-50: The ALTO client protocol MUST support different
   levels of detail in queries and responses, in order for the operator
   of an ALTO service to be able to control how much information (e.g.,
   about the network topology) is disclosed.

   REQ.  ARv06-51: The operator of an ALTO server MUST NOT assume that
   an ALTO client will implement mechanisms or comply with rules that
   limit the ALTO client's ability to redistribute information retrieved
   from the ALTO server to third parties.

   REQ.  ARv06-52: The ALTO client protocol MUST support different
   levels of detail in queries and responses, in order to protect the
   privacy of users, to ensure that the operators of ALTO servers and
   other users of the same application cannot derive sensitive
   information.

   REQ.  ARv06-53: The ALTO client protocol SHOULD be defined in a way,
   that the operator of one ALTO server cannot easily deduce the
   resource identifier (e.g., file name in P2P file sharing) which the
   resource consumer seeking ALTO guidance wants to access.

   REQ.  ARv06-54: The ALTO client protocol MUST include appropriate
   mechanisms to protect the ALTO service against DoS attacks.










Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


4.  Host Group Descriptors

   Host group descriptors are used in the ALTO client protocol to
   describe the location of a host in the network topology.  The ALTO
   client protocol specification defines a basic set of host group
   descriptor types, which have to be supported by all implementations,
   and an extension procedure for adding new descriptor types (see
   Section 3.1.2).  The following list gives an overview on further host
   group descriptor types that have been proposed in the past, or which
   are in use by ALTO-related prototype implementations.  This list is
   not intended as normative text.  Instead, the only purpose of the
   following list is to document the descriptor types that have been
   proposed so far, and to solicit further feedback and discussion:

   o  Autonomous System (AS) number

   o  Protocol-specific group identifiers, which expand to a set of IP
      address ranges (CIDR) and/or AS numbers.  In one specific solution
      proposal, these are called Partition ID (PID).
































Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


5.  Rating Criteria

   Rating criteria are used in the ALTO client protocol to express
   topology- or connectivity-related properties, which are evaluated in
   order to generate the ALTO guidance.  The ALTO client protocol
   specification defines a basic set of rating criteria, which have to
   be supported by all implementations, and an extension procedure for
   adding new criteria (see Section 3.1.3).  The following list gives an
   overview on further rating criteria that have been proposed in the
   past, or which are in use by ALTO-related prototype implementations.
   This list is not intended as normative text.  Instead, the only
   purpose of the following list is to document the rating criteria that
   have been proposed so far, and to solicit further feedback and
   discussion:

5.1.  Distance-related Rating Criteria

   o  Relative topological distance: relative means that a larger
      numerical value means greater distance, but it is up to the ALTO
      service how to compute the values, and the ALTO client will not be
      informed about the nature of the information.  One way of
      generating this kind of information MAY be counting AS hops, but
      when querying this parameter, the ALTO client MUST NOT assume that
      the numbers actually are AS hops.

   o  Absolute topological distance, expressed in the number of
      traversed autonomous systems (AS).

   o  Absolute topological distance, expressed in the number of router
      hops (i.e., how much the TTL value of an IP packet will be
      decreased during transit).

   o  Absolute physical distance, based on knowledge of the approximate
      geolocation (continent, country) of an IP address.

5.2.  Charging-related Rating Criteria

   o  Traffic volume caps, in case the Internet access of the resource
      consumer is not charged by "flat rate".  For each candidate
      resource provider, the ALTO service could indicate the amount of
      data that may be transferred from/to this resource provider until
      a given point in time, and how much of this amount has already
      been consumed.  Furthermore, it would have to be indicated how
      excess traffic would be handled (e.g., blocked, throttled, or
      charged separately at an indicated price).  The interaction of
      several applications running on a host, out of which some use this
      criterion while others don't, as well as the evaluation of this
      criterion in resource directories, which issue ALTO queries on



Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


      behalf of other peers, are for further study.

5.3.  Performance-related Rating Criteria

   The following rating criteria are subject to the remarks below.

   o  The minimum achievable throughput between the resource consumer
      and the candidate resource provider, which is considered useful by
      the application (only in ALTO queries), or

   o  An arbitrary upper bound for the throughput from/to the candidate
      resource provider (only in ALTO replies).  This may be, but is not
      necessarily the provisioned access bandwidth of the candidate
      resource provider.

   o  The maximum round-trip time (RTT) between resource consumer and
      the candidate resource provider, which is acceptable for the
      application for useful communication with the candidate resource
      provider (only in ALTO queries), or

   o  An arbitrary lower bound for the RTT between resource consumer and
      the candidate resource provider (only in ALTO replies).  This may
      be, for example, based on measurements of the propagation delay in
      a completely unloaded network.

   The ALTO client MUST be aware, that with high probability, the actual
   performance values differ significantly from these upper and lower
   bounds.  In particular, an ALTO client MUST NOT consider the "upper
   bound for throughput" parameter as a permission to send data at the
   indicated rate without using congestion control mechanisms.

   The discrepancies are due to various reasons, including, but not
   limited to the facts that

   o  the ALTO service is not an admission control system

   o  the ALTO service may not know the instantaneous congestion status
      of the network

   o  the ALTO service may not know all link bandwidths, i.e., where the
      bottleneck really is, and there may be shared bottlenecks

   o  the ALTO service may not know whether the candidate peer itself is
      overloaded

   o  the ALTO service may not know whether the candidate peer throttles
      the bandwidth it devotes for the considered application




Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


   o  the ALTO service may not know whether the candidate peer will
      throttle the data it sends to us (e.g., because of some fairness
      algorithm, such as tit-for-tat)

   Because of these inaccuracies and the lack of complete, instantaneous
   state information, which are inherent to the ALTO service, the
   application must use other mechanisms (such as passive measurements
   on actual data transmissions) to assess the currently achievable
   throughput, and it MUST use appropriate congestion control mechanisms
   in order to avoid a congestion collapse.  Nevertheless, these rating
   criteria may provide a useful shortcut for quickly excluding
   candidate resource providers from such probing, if it is known in
   advance that connectivity is in any case worse than what is
   considered the minimum useful value by the respective application.

5.4.  Inappropriate Rating Criteria

   Rating criteria that SHOULD NOT be defined for and used by the ALTO
   service include:

   o  Performance metrics that are closely related to the instantaneous
      congestion status.  The definition of alternate approaches for
      congestion control is explicitly out of the scope of ALTO.
      Instead, other appropriate means, such as using TCP based
      transport, have to be used to avoid congestion.


























Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


6.  IANA Considerations

   This requirements document does not mandate any immediate IANA
   actions.  However, such IANA considerations may arise from future
   ALTO specification documents which try to meet the requirements given
   here.













































Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


7.  Security Considerations

7.1.  High-level security considerations

   High-level security considerations for the ALTO service can be found
   in the "Security Considerations" section of the ALTO problem
   statement document [RFC5693].

7.2.  Classification of Information Disclosure Scenarios

   The unwanted disclosure of information is one key concern related to
   ALTO.  The following list gives a classification of information
   disclosure scenarios, which may be considered more or less critical
   by different parties:

   o  (1) Excess disclosure of ALTO server operator's data to an
      authorized ALTO client.  The operator of an ALTO server has to
      feed information, such as tables mapping host group descriptors to
      host characteristics attributes, into the server, thereby enabling
      it to give guidance to ALTO clients.  Some operators might
      consider the full set of this information confidential (e.g., a
      detailed map of the operator's network topology), and might want
      to disclose only a subset of it or somehow obfuscated information
      to an ALTO client.

   o  (2) Disclosure of the application behavior to the ALTO server.
      The operator of an ALTO server could infer the application
      behavior (e.g., content identifiers in P2P file sharing
      applications, or lists of resource providers that are considered
      for establishing a connection) from the ALTO queries sent by an
      ALTO client.

   o  (3) Disclosure of ALTO server operator's data (e.g., network
      topology information) to an unauthorized third party.  There are a
      couple of sub-cases here:

      *  (3a) An ALTO server sends the information directly to an
         unauthorized ALTO client.

      *  (3b) An unauthorized party snoops on the data transmission from
         the ALTO server to an authorized ALTO client.

      *  (3c) An authorized ALTO client knowingly forwards the
         information it had received from the ALTO server to an
         unauthorized party.






Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


   o  (4) Disclosure of the application behavior to an unauthorized
      third party.

   o  (5) Excess retrieval of ALTO server operator's data by
      collaborating ALTO clients.  Several authorized ALTO clients could
      ask an ALTO server for guidance, and redistribute the replies
      among each other (see also case 3c).  By correlating the ALTO
      replies they could find out more information than intended to be
      disclosed by the ALTO server operator.

   (1) may be addressed by the ALTO server operator choosing the level
   of detail of the information to be populated into the ALTO server.
   Furthermore, access control mechanisms for filtering ALTO replies
   according to the authenticated ALTO client identity might be
   installed in the ALTO server, although this might not be effective
   given the lack of efficient mechanisms for addressing (3c) and (5),
   see below.

   (2) is addressed by allowing ALTO clients to use the target-
   independent query mode.  In this mode of operation, guiding
   information (e.g., "maps") is retrieved from the ALTO server and used
   entirely locally by the ALTO client, i.e., without sending host
   location attributes of candidate resource providers to the ALTO
   server.  In the target-aware query mode, (2) can be addressed by ALTO
   clients by obfuscating the identity of candidate resource consumers,
   e.g., by zeroing-out or randomizing the last few bits of the IP
   addresses.  However, there is the potential side effect of yielding
   inaccurate results.

   (3a), (3b), and (4) may be addressed by authentication, access
   control, and encryption schemes for the ALTO client protocol.
   However, deployment of encryption schemes might not be effective
   given the lack of efficient mechanisms for addressing (3c) and (5),
   see below.

   Straightforward authentication and encryption schemes won't help
   solving (3c) and (5), and there is no other simple and efficient
   mechanism known.  The cost of complex approaches, e.g., based on
   digital rights management (DRM), might easily outweigh the benefits
   of the whole ALTO solution, and therefore they are not considered as
   a viable solution.  That is, ALTO server operators must be aware that
   (3c) and (5) cannot be prevented from happening, and therefore they
   should feed only such data into an ALTO server, which they do not
   consider sensitive with respect to (3c) and (5).

   These insights are reflected by the requirements presented in this
   document.




Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


7.3.  Security Requirements

   For a set of specific security requirements please refer to
   Section 3.3 of this document.















































Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

8.2.  Informative References

   [ALTO-charter]
              Marocco, E. and V. Gurbani, "Application-Layer Traffic
              Optimization (ALTO) Working Group Charter", February 2009.

   [RFC4787]  Audet, F. and C. Jennings, "Network Address Translation
              (NAT) Behavioral Requirements for Unicast UDP", BCP 127,
              RFC 4787, January 2007.

   [RFC5382]  Guha, S., Biswas, K., Ford, B., Sivakumar, S., and P.
              Srisuresh, "NAT Behavioral Requirements for TCP", BCP 142,
              RFC 5382, October 2008.

   [RFC5693]  Seedorf, J. and E. Burger, "Application-Layer Traffic
              Optimization (ALTO) Problem Statement", RFC 5693,
              October 2009.



























Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


Appendix A.  Contributors

   The authors were supported by the following people, who have
   contributed to this document:

   o  Richard Alimi <richard.alimi@yale.edu>

   o  Zoran Despotovic <despotovic@docomolab-euro.com>

   o  Jason Livingood <Jason_Livingood@cable.comcast.com>

   o  Saverio Niccolini <saverio.niccolini@nw.neclab.eu>

   o  Jan Seedorf <jan.seedorf@nw.neclab.eu>

   The authors would like to thank the members of the P2PI and ALTO
   mailing lists for their feedback.


































Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 25]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


Appendix B.  Acknowledgments

   The initial version of this document was co-authored by Laird Popkin.

   The authors would like to thank

   o  Vijay K. Gurbani <vkg@alcatel-lucent.com>

   o  Enrico Marocco <enrico.marocco@telecomitalia.it>

   for fostering discussions that lead to the creation of this document,
   and for giving valuable comments on it.

   Laird Popkin and Y. Richard Yang are grateful to the many
   contributions made by the members of the P4P working group and Yale
   Laboratory of Networked Systems.  The P4P working group is hosted by
   DCIA.

   Saverio Niccolini, Jan Seedorf, and Martin Stiemerling are partially
   supported by the NAPA-WINE project (Network-Aware P2P-TV Application
   over Wise Networks, http://www.napa-wine.org), a research project
   supported by the European Commission under its 7th Framework Program
   (contract no. 214412).  The views and conclusions contained herein
   are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily
   representing the official policies or endorsements, either expressed
   or implied, of the NAPA-WINE project or the European Commission.

























Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 26]

Internet-Draft              ALTO Requirements               October 2010


Authors' Addresses

   Sebastian Kiesel (editor)
   University of Stuttgart Computing Center
   Allmandring 30
   Stuttgart  70550
   Germany

   Email: ietf-alto@skiesel.de
   URI:   http://www.rus.uni-stuttgart.de/nks/


   Stefano Previdi
   Cisco Systems, Inc.

   Email: sprevidi@cisco.com


   Martin Stiemerling
   NEC Laboratories Europe/University of Goettingen

   Email: martin.stiemerling@neclab.eu
   URI:   http://ietf.stiemerling.org


   Richard Woundy
   Comcast Corporation

   Email: Richard_Woundy@cable.comcast.com


   Yang Richard Yang
   Yale University

   Email: yry@cs.yale.edu
















Kiesel, et al.           Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 27]

