


ALTO                                                           S. Kiesel
Internet-Draft                                   University of Stuttgart
Intended status: Standards Track                          M. Stiemerling
Expires: September 22, 2013                              NEC Europe Ltd.
                                                               N. Schwan
                                                      Stuttgart, Germany
                                                               M. Scharf
                                                Alcatel-Lucent Bell Labs
                                                                 H. Song
                                                                  Huawei
                                                          March 21, 2013


                         ALTO Server Discovery
                  draft-ietf-alto-server-discovery-08

Abstract

   The goal of Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO) is to
   provide guidance to applications that have to select one or several
   hosts from a set of candidates capable of providing a desired
   resource.  ALTO is realized by a client-server protocol.  Before an
   ALTO client can ask for guidance it needs to discover one or more
   ALTO servers that can provide suitable guidance.

   This document specifies a procedure for resource consumer initiated
   ALTO server discovery, which can be used if the ALTO client is
   embedded in the resource consumer.























Kiesel, et al.         Expires September 22, 2013               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            ALTO Server Discovery               March 2013


Terminology and Requirements Language

   This document makes use of the ALTO terminology defined in [RFC5693].

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 22, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.












Kiesel, et al.         Expires September 22, 2013               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            ALTO Server Discovery               March 2013


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  ALTO Server Discovery Procedure Overview . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  ALTO Server Discovery Procedure Specification  . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  Step 1: Retrieving the Domain Name . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       3.1.1.  Step 1, Option 1: User input . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       3.1.2.  Step 1, Option 2: DHCP . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.2.  Step 2: U-NAPTR Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Deployment Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.1.  Issues with Home Gateways  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.2.  Issues with Multihoming, Mobility and Changing IP
           Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.1.  General Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     6.2.  Security Considerations for U-NAPTR  . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   Appendix A.  Contributors List and Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . 15
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16





























Kiesel, et al.         Expires September 22, 2013               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            ALTO Server Discovery               March 2013


1.  Introduction

   The goal of Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO) is to
   provide guidance to applications that have to select one or several
   hosts from a set of candidates capable of providing a desired
   resource [RFC5693].  ALTO is realized by a client-server protocol;
   see requirement AR-1 in [RFC6708].  Before an ALTO client can ask for
   guidance it needs to discover one or more ALTO servers that can
   provide suitable guidance.

   This document specifies a procedure for resource consumer initiated
   ALTO server discovery, which can be used if the ALTO client is
   embedded in the resource consumer.  In other words, this document
   tries to meet requirement AR-32 in [RFC6708] while AR-33 is out of
   scope.  A different approach, which tries to meet requirement AR-33,
   i.e., third-party ALTO server discovery, is addressed in
   [I-D.kist-alto-3pdisc].

   The ALTO protocol specification [I-D.ietf-alto-protocol] is based on
   HTTP and expects the discovery procedure to yield an HTTP(S) URI.
   Therefore, this procedure is based on U-NAPTR [RFC4848].  It tries to
   directly find one or more ALTO server(s) that can give suitable
   guidance to the ALTO client.  Other schemes, such as discovering a
   random ALTO server (which might not be able to give suitable guidance
   to the client in question) and asking it to redirect the client to a
   better server, are not considered in this document.

   A more detailed discussion of various options where to place the
   funcional entities comprising the overall ALTO architecture can be
   found in [I-D.ietf-alto-deployments].





















Kiesel, et al.         Expires September 22, 2013               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            ALTO Server Discovery               March 2013


2.  ALTO Server Discovery Procedure Overview

   The ALTO protocol specification [I-D.ietf-alto-protocol] expects that
   the ALTO discovery procedure yields the HTTP(S) URI of the ALTO
   server's Information Resource Directory, which gives further
   information about the capabilities and services provided by that ALTO
   server.

   The ALTO server discovery procedure is performed in two steps:

   1.  One or - in case of multiple interfaces and/or IPv4/v6 dual stack
       operation - more DNS domain names are yielded, either by manual
       input or by means of DHCP.

   2.  These DNS domain names are used for U-NAPTR lookups yielding one
       or more URIs.  Further DNS lookups may be neccessary to determine
       the ALTO server's IP address(es).

   The primary means for retrieving the DNS domain name is DHCP.
   However, there may be situations where DHCP is not available or does
   not return a suitable value.  Furthermore, there might be situations
   in which the user whishes to override the value that could be
   retrieved from DHCP.  In these situations, manual input may be used.

   Typically, but not neccessarily, the DNS domain name is the domain
   name in which the client is located, i.e., a PTR lookup on the
   client's IP address would yield a similar name.  However, due to the
   widespread use of network address translation (NAT), trying to
   determine the DNS domain name through a PTR lookup on an interface's
   IP address is not recommended for resource consumer initiated ALTO
   server discovery.




















Kiesel, et al.         Expires September 22, 2013               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            ALTO Server Discovery               March 2013


3.  ALTO Server Discovery Procedure Specification

   As already outlined in Section 2 the ALTO server discovery procedure
   is performed in two steps, which will be specified in Section 3.1 and
   Section 3.2, respectively.

3.1.  Step 1: Retrieving the Domain Name

3.1.1.  Step 1, Option 1: User input

   A user may want to use an ALTO service instance provided by an entity
   that is not the operator of the underlying IP network.  Therefore, we
   allow the user to specify a DNS domain name, for example in a
   configuration file option.  An example domain name is:

      my-alternative-alto-provider.example.org

   In case no ALTO-specific NAPTR records are found, we consider the
   discovery process based on user input as failed.  A client MAY try to
   continue with DHCP (see below).  If DHCP-based discovery succeeds the
   software SHOULD inform the user that the user input has been ignored
   and replaced by information retrieved from the network.

3.1.2.  Step 1, Option 2: DHCP

   As a second option network operators may configure the domain name to
   be used for service discovery within an access network using DHCP.

   RFC 5986 [RFC5986] defines DHCP IPv4 and IPv6 access network domain
   name options to identify a domain name that is suitable for service
   discovery within the access network.  RFC 2132 [RFC2132] defines the
   DHCP IPv4 domain name option.  While this option is less suitable, it
   still may be useful if the RFC 5986 option is not available.

   For IPv6, the ALTO server discovery procedure MUST try to retrieve
   DHCP option 57 (OPTION_V6_ACCESS_DOMAIN).  If no such option can be
   retrieved the procedure fails for this interface.  For IPv4, the ALTO
   server discovery procedure MUST try to retrieve DHCP option 213
   (OPTION_V4_ACCESS_DOMAIN).  If no such option can be retrieved, the
   procedure SHOULD try to retrieve option 15 (Domain Name).  If neither
   option can be retrieved the procedure fails for this interface.  If a
   result can be retrieved it will be used as an input for the next step
   (U-NAPTR resolution).  One example result could be:

      example.net






Kiesel, et al.         Expires September 22, 2013               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            ALTO Server Discovery               March 2013


3.2.  Step 2: U-NAPTR Resolution

   The first step of the ALTO server discovery procedure (see
   Section 3.1) yielded one or - in case of multiple interfaces and/or
   IPv4/v6 dual stack operation - several domain names, which will be
   used as U-NAPTR/DDDS (URI-Enabled NAPTR/Dynamic Delegation Discovery
   Service) [RFC4848] application unique strings.  An example is:

      example.net

   In the second step, the ALTO Server discovery procedure uses a
   U-NAPTR [RFC4848] lookup with the "ALTO" Application Service Tag and
   either the "http" or the "https" Application Protocol Tag to obtain
   one or more URIs (indicating protocol, host and possibly path
   elements) for the ALTO server's Information Resource Directory.  In
   this document, only the HTTP and HTTPS URI schemes are defined, as
   the ALTO protocol specification defines the access over both
   protocols, but no other [I-D.ietf-alto-protocol].  Note that the
   result can be any valid HTTP(S) URI.

   The following two U-NAPTR resource records can be used for mapping
   "example.net" to the HTTPS URI
   https://altoserver.example.net/secure/directory or the HTTP URI
   http://altoserver.example.net/directory, with the former being
   preferred.

       example.net.

       IN NAPTR 100  10   "u"    "ALTO:https"
            "!.*!https://altoserver.example.net/secure/directory!"  ""

       IN NAPTR 200  10   "u"    "ALTO:http"
            "!.*!http://altoserver.example.net/directory!"  ""

   If no ALTO-specific U-NAPTR records can be retrieved, the discovery
   procedure fails for this domain name (and the corresponding interface
   and IP protocol version).  If further domain names yielded by Step 1
   are known, the discovery procedure may perform the corresponding
   U-NAPTR lookups immediately.  However, before retrying a lookup that
   has failed, a client MUST wait a time period that is appropriate for
   the encountered error (NXDOMAIN, timeout, etc.).










Kiesel, et al.         Expires September 22, 2013               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            ALTO Server Discovery               March 2013


4.  Deployment Considerations

4.1.  Issues with Home Gateways

   Section 3.1.2 describes the usage of a DHCP option.  It enables the
   network operator of the network, in which the ALTO client is located,
   to provide a DNS domain name.  However, this assumes that this
   particular DHCP option is correctly passed from the DHCP server to
   the actual host with the ALTO client, and that the particular host
   understands this DHCP option.  This memo assumes the client to be
   able to understand the proposed DHCP option, otherwise there is no
   further use of the DHCP option, but the client has to use the other
   proposed mechanisms.

   There are well-known issues with the handling of DHCP options in home
   gateways.  One issue is that unknown DHCP options are not passed
   through some home gateways, effectively eliminating the DHCP option.

   Another well-known issues is the usage of home gateway specific DNS
   domain names which "override" the DNS domain name provided by the
   network operator.  For instance, a host behind a home gateway may
   receive a DNS domain name ".local" instead of "example.net".  In
   general, this domain name is not usable for the server discovery
   procedure, unless a DNS server in the home gateway resolves the
   corresponding NAPTR lookup correctly, e.g., by means of a DNS split
   horizon approach.

4.2.  Issues with Multihoming, Mobility and Changing IP Addresses

   If the user decides to enter the DNS domain name manually, only one
   set of ALTO servers will be discovered, irrespectively of multihoming
   and mobilility.  Particularly in mobile scenarios this can lead to
   undesirable results.

   The DHCP-based discovery method can discover different sets of ALTO
   servers for each interface and address familly (i.e., IPv4/v6).  In
   general, if a client wishes to communicate using one of its
   interfaces and using a specific IP address familiy, it SHOULD query
   the ALTO server(s) that have been discovered for this specific
   interface and address family.  Selecting an interface and IP address
   family, as well as comparing results returned from different ALTO
   servers, is out of the scope of this document.

   A change of the IP address at an interface invalidates the result of
   the ALTO server discovery procedure.  For instance, if the IP address
   assigned to a mobile host changes due to host mobility, it is
   required to re-run the ALTO server discovery procedure without
   relying on earlier gained information.



Kiesel, et al.         Expires September 22, 2013               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            ALTO Server Discovery               March 2013


   There are several challenges with DNS on hosts with multiple
   interfaces [RFC6418], which can affect the ALTO server discovery.  If
   the DNS resolution is performed on the wrong interface, it can return
   an ALTO server that could provide sub-optimal or wrong guidance.
   Finding the best ALTO server for multi-interfaced hosts is outside
   the scope of this document.

   When using Virtual Private Network (VPN) connections there is usually
   no DHCP.  The user has to enter the DNS domain name manually.  For
   good optimization results, a DNS domain name corresponding to the VPN
   concentrator, not corrsponding to the user's current location, has to
   be entered.  Similar considerations apply for Mobile IP.







































Kiesel, et al.         Expires September 22, 2013               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            ALTO Server Discovery               March 2013


5.  IANA Considerations

   IANA is requested to register the following U-NAPTR [RFC4848]
   application service tag for ALTO:

   Application Service Tag:  ALTO

   Intended usage:  see [RFC5693] or: "The goal of Application-Layer
      Traffic Optimization (ALTO) is to provide guidance to applications
      that have to select one or several hosts from a set of candidates
      capable of providing a desired resource."

   Defining Publication:  The specification contained within this
      document

   Contact information:  The authors of this document

   Author/Change controller:  The IESG

   Interoperability considerations:  No interoperability issues are
      known or expected.  This tag is to be registered specifically for
      ALTO, which is a new application without any legacy deployments.

   Security considerations:  see Section 6 and in particular Section 6.2
      of this document.

   Related publications:  This document specifies a procedure for
      discovering an HTTP or HTTPS URI of an ALTO server.  HTTP is
      specified in [RFC2616] and HTTPS is specified in [RFC2818].  The
      HTTP(S)-based ALTO protocol is specified in
      [I-D.ietf-alto-protocol].




   Application Protocol Tag:  This document specifies how to use the
      application service tag "ALTO" with the application protocol tags
      "http" (defining publication: [RFC2616] and "https" (defining
      publication: [RFC2818]), which have already been registered in the
      respective IANA registry.  Therefore, IANA is not requested by
      this document to register any new application protocol tag.










Kiesel, et al.         Expires September 22, 2013              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            ALTO Server Discovery               March 2013


6.  Security Considerations

6.1.  General Security Considerations

   There are two different failures for the ALTO server discovery, which
   can both be caused by malicious attacks or by configuration problems,
   e.g., in case of DNS configuration errors or multi-homed hosts.

   First, the discovery might not be able to discover an ALTO server,
   even if a suitable ALTO server exists.  In that case, ALTO guidance
   will not be used.  The resulting application performance and traffic
   distribution will subsequently correspond to a deployment scenario
   without ALTO guidance.

   Second, the discovery procedure may discover a sub-optimal or wrong
   ALTO server.  Such an ALTO server may either not be able to provide
   information for a given resource consumer (e.g., behind a NAT), thus
   rendering the ALTO service useless.  Alternatively, said ALTO server
   may provide suboptimal or forged information.  In the latter case,
   attackers could try to use ALTO to affect the traffic distribution or
   the performance of applications.  Users may then observe performance
   problems, and network operators could detect traffic anormalities.  A
   potential counter-measure is to disable the use of the ALTO service.

   Security issues of ALTO in general and potential solutions are also
   discussed in [I-D.ietf-alto-protocol].

6.2.  Security Considerations for U-NAPTR

   The address of an ALTO server is usually well-known within an access
   network; therefore, interception of messages does not introduce any
   specific concerns.

   The primary attack against the methods described in this document is
   one that would lead to impersonation of an ALTO server since a device
   does not necessarily have a prior relationship with an ALTO server.

   An attacker could attempt to compromise ALTO discovery at any of
   three stages:

   1.  providing a falsified domain name to be used as input to U-NAPTR;

   2.  altering the DNS records used in U-NAPTR resolution;

   3.  impersonation of the ALTO server.

   This document focuses on the U-NAPTR resolution process and hence
   this section discusses the security considerations related to the DNS



Kiesel, et al.         Expires September 22, 2013              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            ALTO Server Discovery               March 2013


   handling.  The security aspects of obtaining the domain name that is
   used for input to the U-NAPTR process is described in respective
   documents, such as [RFC5986].

   The domain name that is used to authenticated the ALTO server is the
   domain name in the URI that is the result of the U-NAPTR resolution.
   Therefore, if an attacker was able to modify or spoof any of the DNS
   records used in the DDDS resolution, this URI could be replaced by an
   invalid URI.  The application of DNS security (DNSSEC) [RFC4033]
   provides a means to limit attacks that rely on modification of the
   DNS records used in U-NAPTR resolution.  Security considerations
   specific to U-NAPTR are described in more detail in [RFC4848].

   An "https:" URI is authenticated using the method described in
   Section 3.1 of [RFC2818].  The domain name used for this
   authentication is the domain name in the URI resulting from U-NAPTR
   resolution, not the input domain name as in [RFC3958].  Using the
   domain name in the URI is more compatible with existing HTTP client
   software, which authenticate servers based on the domain name in the
   URI.































Kiesel, et al.         Expires September 22, 2013              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft            ALTO Server Discovery               March 2013


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2132]  Alexander, S. and R. Droms, "DHCP Options and BOOTP Vendor
              Extensions", RFC 2132, March 1997.

   [RFC3958]  Daigle, L. and A. Newton, "Domain-Based Application
              Service Location Using SRV RRs and the Dynamic Delegation
              Discovery Service (DDDS)", RFC 3958, January 2005.

   [RFC4848]  Daigle, L., "Domain-Based Application Service Location
              Using URIs and the Dynamic Delegation Discovery Service
              (DDDS)", RFC 4848, April 2007.

   [RFC5986]  Thomson, M. and J. Winterbottom, "Discovering the Local
              Location Information Server (LIS)", RFC 5986,
              September 2010.

7.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-alto-deployments]
              Stiemerling, M., Kiesel, S., and S. Previdi, "ALTO
              Deployment Considerations", draft-ietf-alto-deployments-06
              (work in progress), February 2013.

   [I-D.ietf-alto-protocol]
              Alimi, R., Penno, R., and Y. Yang, "ALTO Protocol",
              draft-ietf-alto-protocol-14 (work in progress),
              February 2013.

   [I-D.kist-alto-3pdisc]
              Kiesel, S., Krause, K., and M. Stiemerling, "Third-Party
              ALTO Server Discovery (3pdisc)", draft-kist-alto-3pdisc-02
              (work in progress), February 2013.

   [RFC2616]  Fielding, R., Gettys, J., Mogul, J., Frystyk, H.,
              Masinter, L., Leach, P., and T. Berners-Lee, "Hypertext
              Transfer Protocol -- HTTP/1.1", RFC 2616, June 1999.

   [RFC2818]  Rescorla, E., "HTTP Over TLS", RFC 2818, May 2000.

   [RFC4033]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "DNS Security Introduction and Requirements",
              RFC 4033, March 2005.



Kiesel, et al.         Expires September 22, 2013              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft            ALTO Server Discovery               March 2013


   [RFC5693]  Seedorf, J. and E. Burger, "Application-Layer Traffic
              Optimization (ALTO) Problem Statement", RFC 5693,
              October 2009.

   [RFC6418]  Blanchet, M. and P. Seite, "Multiple Interfaces and
              Provisioning Domains Problem Statement", RFC 6418,
              November 2011.

   [RFC6708]  Kiesel, S., Previdi, S., Stiemerling, M., Woundy, R., and
              Y. Yang, "Application-Layer Traffic Optimization (ALTO)
              Requirements", RFC 6708, September 2012.








































Kiesel, et al.         Expires September 22, 2013              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft            ALTO Server Discovery               March 2013


Appendix A.  Contributors List and Acknowledgments

   The initial version of this document was co-authored by Marco Tomsu.

   Hannes Tschofenig provided the initial input to the U-NAPTR solution
   part.  Hannes and Martin Thomson provided excellent feedback and
   input to the server discovery.

   Olafur Gudmundsson provided an excellent DNS expert review on an
   earlier version of this document.

   The authors would also like to thank the following persons for their
   contribution to this document or its predecessors: Richard Alimi,
   David Bryan, Roni Even, Gustavo Garcia, Jay Gu, Xingfeng Jiang,
   Enrico Marocco, Victor Pascual, Y. Richard Yang, Yu-Shun Wang, Yunfei
   Zhang, Ning Zong.

   Michael Scharf is supported by the German-Lab project
   (http://www.german-lab.de) funded by the German Federal Ministry of
   Education and Research (BMBF).

   Martin Stiemerling is partially supported by the CHANGE project
   (http://www.change-project.eu), a research project supported by the
   European Commission under its 7th Framework Program (contract no.
   257422).  The views and conclusions contained herein are those of the
   authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the
   official policies or endorsements, either expressed or implied, of
   the CHANGE project or the European Commission.























Kiesel, et al.         Expires September 22, 2013              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft            ALTO Server Discovery               March 2013


Authors' Addresses

   Sebastian Kiesel
   University of Stuttgart Computing Center
   Allmandring 30
   Stuttgart  70550
   Germany

   Email: ietf-alto@skiesel.de
   URI:   http://www.rus.uni-stuttgart.de/nks/


   Martin Stiemerling
   NEC Laboratories Europe
   Kurfuerstenanlage 36
   Heidelberg  69115
   Germany

   Phone: +49 6221 4342 113
   Email: martin.stiemerling@neclab.eu
   URI:   http://ietf.stiemerling.org


   Nico Schwan
   Stuttgart, Germany

   Email: ietf@nico-schwan.de


   Michael Scharf
   Alcatel-Lucent Bell Labs
   Lorenzstrasse 10
   Stuttgart  70435
   Germany

   Email: michael.scharf@alcatel-lucent.com
   URI:   www.alcatel-lucent.com/bell-labs


   Haibin Song
   Huawei

   Email: melodysong@huawei.com








Kiesel, et al.         Expires September 22, 2013              [Page 16]

