 



INTERNET-DRAFT                                                 J. Guerin
Intended Status: Proposed Standard                           Independent
Expires: December 3, 2011                                   June 1, 2011

                    Pay It Proper Protocol -- PIPP 
                       draft-jguerin-pipp-01.txt


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as
   Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   Comments are solicited and should be addressed to the author at
   jguerin@shootingsoul.com

Copyright and License Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents     
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document. Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


 


J. Guerin               Expires December 3, 2011                [Page 1]

INTERNET DRAFT                    PIPP                      June 1, 2011


Abstract

   The Pay It Proper Protocol (PIPP) is an application-level network
   protocol for inter-process communication that defines a universal
   Turing machine.  PIPP introduces the concept of a sub stream to the
   traditional network stream allowing instructions and data to be
   streamed on a single tape.  All processes on a sub stream aware
   network are programmable against instruction sets allowing for more
   expressive languages and compilers to be developed.  PIPP is designed
   to be the universal bootstrapping protocol and instruction format for
   the Internet until more advanced protocols, compilers and formats are
   developed.  This RFC defines sub streaming and the PIPP protocol.  A
   proof of concept has been implemented, and a sample instruction
   format and some implementation details are also discussed.  

Table of Contents

   1  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
      1.1  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2  Sub Streaming  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
      2.1  Implementation Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
      2.2  Instruction and Data Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   3  Pay It Proper Protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
      3.1 End Point to End Point . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
         3.1.1 Frame Header Format . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
      3.2 End Point to Output Main Stream and Output Sub Stream  . . . 7
      3.3 End Point to Input Main Stream and Input Sub Stream  . . . . 7
      3.4 Design Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
         3.4.1 Separation of Concerns  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
         3.4.2 Inclusiveness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
         3.4.3 Anticipation of Change  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   4  Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
      4.1 String Instruction Format  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
      4.2  Browser and Operating System  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
      4.3  Language Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
         4.3.1 Destructors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
         4.3.2 Exception Handling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   6  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   6  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   7  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
      8.1  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   9  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
   Author's Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12





 


J. Guerin               Expires December 3, 2011                [Page 2]

INTERNET DRAFT                    PIPP                      June 1, 2011


1  Introduction

   PIPP uses sub streaming to allow instructions and data to be streamed
   on the same tape.  This creates a Turing machine allowing for
   languages and compilers to be developed for processes connected on
   the Internet.  Each process connected on the network can be thought
   of as a finite state machine that communicates with other processes
   on the network by streaming instructions and data.  The concept of
   sub streaming can and should be applied to other network protocols.

   The focus of PIPP is on bootstrapping and universal communication. 
   Applications can define their own instructions in a standard,
   recommended format allowing for communication between processes. 
   This will be sufficient for the short term.  Eventually, applications
   will use higher level languages with compilers creating instructions
   in optimized formats relegating PIPP to the dust bin of computing
   history along side punch cards.  However, just as the concept of the
   stored computer program is still in use today, the concept of sub
   streaming will be around for a long time.

   There is a working proof of concept that implements PIPP.  PIPP is
   used to directly stream data into and out of a database over TCP
   using java.  The data is optionally compressed.  PIPP is also used in
   a javascript web site to communicate to the same java server over
   HTTP.  The same exact java server code communicates with either the
   javascript client or the java client.  The java client is optimized
   to used compressed streaming over TCP, while the javascript client
   does no compression and uses HTTP with simulated streaming similar to
   packet switching.  The java server code does not care if it is a nice
   direct TCP stream or a clunky HTTP request/response flow.  PIPP
   properly abstracts away the details of the network stack from the
   application code.  This illustrates how universal and expressive PIPP
   is.  

   The server code is modeled as a finite state machine, and there are
   practical concerns and limitations.  In order to be compatible with
   HTTP communication, the automata must be capable of a single
   entry/exit point and complete within HTTP timeout and message size
   constraints in order to actually run over HTTP.  A persistent TCP
   connection can use more advanced states and stream more data.

   In short, PIPP streams instructions and data between processes making
   the Internet a universal Turing machine.

1.1  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
 


J. Guerin               Expires December 3, 2011                [Page 3]

INTERNET DRAFT                    PIPP                      June 1, 2011


   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119]. 
   The grammatical rules in this document are to be interpreted as
   described in RFC 5234 [RFC5234].

2  Sub Streaming

   Sub streaming creates the concept of a single main stream and a
   single sub stream.  It's all the same stream, just given a very basic
   structure.  The main stream can give control of the stream to the sub
   stream, and the sub stream can give control back to the main stream. 
   This allows creation of a Turing machine by using the main stream for
   instructions and the sub stream for data on the same stream.  Since
   the sub stream is itself a stream, you can recursively define Turing
   machines all on a single original stream.

   This is not to be confused with multiplexing which creates separate,
   independent streams on a stream.  There is no communication between
   the streams being multiplexed.  The subtle communication of control
   between main and sub stream makes all the difference in this world :)

   It's useful to think of an application as a main stream of
   instructions.  So one application communicates with another
   application and eventually they want to work with data.  Sub
   streaming allows an application to simply transfer control of the
   stream to the data stream.  So app "A" main stream gives control to
   app "A" data sub stream to be given to app "B" main stream for
   processing.  Once app "A" data sub stream reaches its end of sub
   stream, control is given back to app "A" main stream.  Now app "A"
   main stream and app "B" main stream are communicating with each other
   again.  What just happened is a continuous flow of instructions and
   data on the same stream between processes.  Therefore the two process
   communicating together act as a universal Turing machine since they
   use the same stream for instructions and data.  Processes can be
   added and removed  creating one large, dynamic universal Turing
   machine.

2.1  Implementation Considerations

   Implementing this in a network protocol has a few issues to address. 
   You need to identify data as belonging to either the main stream or
   the sub stream and make sure instructions and data are sent in a
   timely manner to prevent applications from hanging.  

   At some point in the network stack, data is framed.  In theory, you
   can minimally define a frame with zero data as the end of the sub
   stream and trust the application to transfer control accordingly. 
   This is fine for applications that behave perfectly when opening and
   closing sub streams.  In practice, you have the issue of stream
 


J. Guerin               Expires December 3, 2011                [Page 4]

INTERNET DRAFT                    PIPP                      June 1, 2011


   stomping and stream leaking.  A data sub stream may try to read main
   stream instructions or a data sub stream may close early and leave
   it's data on the stream to be treated as instructions.  The goal is
   to protect the main instruction stream against such issues.  This is
   achieved by using a stream type indicator in the frame header.  You
   have three types: main stream, sub stream or end of sub stream.  The
   end of sub stream frame also has 0 data.  This is sufficient to guard
   against stream stomping and leaking to protect the main application
   instruction stream.

   Flushing is a concern.  You can't have an application waiting for
   data or instructions that are buffered at the other end point.  A
   simple solution is to flush after each instruction and flush on the
   close of a data sub stream.  This is fine for simple inter-process
   communication.  Once compilers get involved creating large, complex
   instructions they can optimize flushing by grouping instructions
   together.  Applications already have control over flushing the data
   sub stream, so the application logic can handle optimizing that.

   These are the general considerations that all network protocols need
   to address to implement sub streaming.

2.2  Instruction and Data Considerations

   The network protocol is not concerned with what bytes are on the main
   stream or data sub stream.  It only provides the distinction for
   applications to use.  Applications will process and interpret the
   instructions and data.  Moreover, applications may mix instructions
   and data on the main stream.  The framing of instructions is not part
   of the network protocol.  Applications decide what instruction
   formats and sets to use and work with.  Instruction framing can be
   done by using a well defined grammar or an instruction header with a
   size.  Again, that is outside the scope of the network protocol.

3  Pay It Proper Protocol 

   PIPP is designed to be run at the highest level of the network stack
   and defines sub streaming communication between two end-points. 
   There is no handshake or connection process between end points, and
   no guarantees of message delivery or receipt.  The protocol makes no
   distinction between client and server.  The protocol is independent
   of the underlying transport layer and connection.  The protocol
   itself is stateless.  If an underlying persistent connection is
   available to allow for end points to freely communicate, then an
   application can take advantage of that situation.  If a connection
   can only be initiated by one end point and stay open for a short
   time, then an application can work with that situation as well.  

 


J. Guerin               Expires December 3, 2011                [Page 5]

INTERNET DRAFT                    PIPP                      June 1, 2011


   PIPP provides sub streaming leaving all other details to the
   underlying network stack and the applications themselves. 
   Instruction formats are outside the scope of the network protocol.

3.1 End Point to End Point

   The following defines the requirements for a PIPP end point
   communicating with another PIPP end point.  In general, the data must
   be framed by the end point with a standard header that defines the
   stream type and payload size.  The end point places no requirements
   on the payload format or encoding.  The only requirement is that the
   entire payload content MUST belong to the stream type indicated in
   the header.  The frames MUST be sent and received in order.

      1. MUST frame data starting with a PIPP header followed by payload
      2. MUST have payload start on the byte following the header
      3. MUST send/receive frames next to each with no gaps
      4. MUST send/receive frames in order
      5. MUST match entire payload contents to stream type

3.1.1 Frame Header Format

      The header MUST be a variable length sequence of UTF-8 encoded
      text conforming to the following grammar.  The encoding is
      described in RFC 3629 [RFC3629].  In general, it's a single letter
      indicating the stream type followed by an integer in quotes
      representing the payload size.  The header size is not explicitly
      given.

      header = stream-type payload-size

      stream-type =  %x6D /              ; m for main stream
                     %x73 /              ; s for sub stream
                     %x74                ; t for end of sub stream 

      payload-size = quotation-mark      ;an integer in quotes
                     digit * ( digit ) 
                     quotation-mark  

      quotation-mark = %x22              ; "

      digit = %x30-39                    ; a text number

      Payload Size Requirements
      1. MUST be convertible to an integer
      2. MUST NOT exceed 32767 numeric value
      2. MUST match number of bytes in payload
      2. MUST be zero for stream-type %x74 (end of sub stream)
 


J. Guerin               Expires December 3, 2011                [Page 6]

INTERNET DRAFT                    PIPP                      June 1, 2011


      3. MUST NOT be zero for stream-type %x6D / %x73 (main/sub stream)

      Header Samples
      m"42"       ; frame of main stream data with 42 bytes
      s"243"      ; frame of sub stream data with 243 bytes
      t"0"        ; end of sub stream frame with no payload

3.2 End Point to Output Main Stream and Output Sub Stream

      The stream behavior is the same for writing and flushing bytes for
      an output main stream and output sub stream as the well known
      output stream.  It's a continuous stream of bytes.  The following
      requirements deal with how the end point manages sharing the
      stream between the main stream and sub stream.

      1. MUST create a new frame when writing bytes for a different
      stream type.

      2. MUST write a frame with end of sub stream type when closing a
      sub stream

      3. MUST flush when closing a sub stream or a main stream

      It is left to applications and compilers to flush instructions on
      the main stream when needed.  That is outside the scope of the
      network protocol.  Moreover, applications may still use the main
      stream for data as well.

3.3 End Point to Input Main Stream and Input Sub Stream

      The stream behavior is the same for reading bytes for an input
      main stream and input sub stream as the well known input stream. 
      It's a continuous stream of bytes.  The following requirements
      deal with how the end point manages sharing the stream between the
      main stream and sub stream.

      1. On a read request, end point MUST block until a frame is
      available unless the end of main stream has been reached.

      2. When a read requests a main stream byte and the current frame
      is main stream a byte MUST be returned.

      3. When a read requests a main stream byte and current frame is
      sub stream or end of sub stream, then the end point MUST skip all
      sub stream frames and end of sub stream frames until a main stream
      frame is reached.  The end point blocks until a main stream frame
      or end of main stream is reached.

 


J. Guerin               Expires December 3, 2011                [Page 7]

INTERNET DRAFT                    PIPP                      June 1, 2011


      4. When a read requests a sub stream byte and the current frame is
      sub stream a byte MUST be returned.

      5. When a read requests a sub stream byte and the current frame is
      main stream, then the end of stream indicator is returned and no
      frames or bytes are read from the stream.

      6. When a read requests a sub stream byte and the current frame is
      end of sub stream, then the end of stream indicator is returned
      and no frames are requested from the stream.  If the very next
      read request is also for a sub stream byte, then the next frame is
      read from the stream and processed accordingly.  This allows two
      sub streams to be processed one after the other.

3.4 Design Considerations

3.4.1 Separation of Concerns

      PIPP is designed specifically for the task of inter-process sub
      streaming communication over the Internet.  Authentication,
      compression, and so on are left to applications and outside the
      scope of a network protocol.  For example, the proof of concept
      uses an end point application to build the underlying network
      stack and optionally use compression.

3.4.2 Inclusiveness

      PIPP is designed to allow as many applications as possible to
      communicate over the Internet.  The design is minimal, yet still
      functional.   Because of it's simplicity, resource limited
      applications can use it.  No response is defined to allow for
      asynchronous communication between applications.  Applications
      needing a synchronous response can use PIPP and wait for
      instructions in return.  UTF-8 encoding allows for applications
      written in various languages to communicate with each other.

3.4.3 Anticipation of Change

      PIPP allows for peer to peer communication between web servers and
      eventually for client applications as improvements to
      telecommunications are made.  In some cases, persistent
      connections are available and/or servers are able to initiate
      communication with clients.  By being independent of the transport
      layer, PIPP can be used with new and improved network protocols as
      they are developed.

4  Recommendations

 


J. Guerin               Expires December 3, 2011                [Page 8]

INTERNET DRAFT                    PIPP                      June 1, 2011


4.1 String Instruction Format

      Instruction formats and sets will be developed and driven by
      social and political influences.  This section informally
      describes an instruction format that is very portable and similar
      to a command line argument or function call.  The instruction is a
      text UTF-8 encoded string.  In general, it's a string function
      name followed by list of option string arguments that must be
      enclosed with [ ].  This grammar can be parsed as instructions
      stream in, so an instruction header with a size is not needed. 
      Strings are well understood.  By not using any implicit
      numeric/boolean types applications know they will always be
      responsible for type conversion.  Besides, why pretend it's not a
      text string.  Nulls are supported for applications that need to
      make a distinction between null and a zero length string.  A null
      is not in quotes where all other strings are in quotes.

      instruction     =   function-name arg-list

      function-name   =   quote escaped-string quote

      arg-list        =   start-arg-list [ arg *(arg-separator arg ) ]
      end-arg-list

      arg             =   null / quote escaped-string quote

      quote           =   %x22              ; "

      start-arg-list  =   %x5B              ; [

      end-arg-list    =   %x5D              ; ]

      arg-separator   =   %x2C              ; ,

      Example instructions
      "huh"["I didn't understand your last instruction."]
      "setToken"[ "123978987lnlj129" ]      ; super secure login token
      "con.open"[ null, "40" ]              ; whatever that means
      "run_proc"[ "userDelete", "jon" ]     ; permission validated 
      "con.close"[]              
      "stop"[]

4.2  Browser and Operating System

      It's useful to make a distinction between an application process
      and resources used by an application process.  The application
      code itself is a resource used by the application process.   A
      browser is very similar to a command prompt.  A user enters a
 


J. Guerin               Expires December 3, 2011                [Page 9]

INTERNET DRAFT                    PIPP                      June 1, 2011


      command, a resource is loaded and code is executed to run the
      application.  HTML is code, javascript is code, java is code and
      so on.  A command prompt runs programs in their own process and
      gives programs a user interface to work in.  A browser should run
      programs in their own process.

      Internet applications should have two connections.  One for secure
      instruction and data communication using a sub streaming protocol
      and another connection for downloading large unsecured resources
      such as code, images, and so on using a protocol optimized for
      that purpose.  Operating Systems and programing platforms should
      focus on improving support for dynamic resource loading and
      caching including dynamically loading code for the application to
      execute.

      The proof of concept illustrates this with an index.html that
      calls a javascript main function.  The rest of the web site is in
      static javascript files with functions to return html elements
      with dynamic element id's.  The html displayed to the user is
      dynamically created by javascript functions with server
      communication done using so-called ajax.  This simulates an
      application running in it's own process using static resources
      that could potentially be loaded dynamically.  This is an
      efficient model for the Internet as the only communication made is
      needed for data transmission and all code is static that can be
      treated as a cached resource.

4.3  Language Design

4.3.1 Destructors

      Stream-based applications require management of resources. 
      Garbage collection helps prevent memory stomping, but does not
      prevent resource leaking.  Forgetting to call delete has been
      replaced by forgetting to call close.  The lack of destructors
      with a well-defined execution time, and the inability to create
      objects on the stack is a hindrance to building stream-based
      applications.  Protecting memory is important and having garbage
      collection is an important safety net to have as well.  Just as
      important is the need to have destructors with a well defined
      execution time to allow for more elegant program designs with
      resources automatically closed in destructors.

4.3.2 Exception Handling 

      Using automata to model software means all known/potential/common
      error conditions are modeled through function calls.  Exception
      handling is a great safety net to have when a true exception to
 


J. Guerin               Expires December 3, 2011               [Page 10]

INTERNET DRAFT                    PIPP                      June 1, 2011


      the automata occurs.  However, it should only be used as a safety
      net.  For example, a file i/o library should provide an efficient
      way to open a file and report a problem status if the open fails
      without throwing an exception.  Exception handling is great for
      unexpected conditions and providing synchronization points to
      protect other sub systems in a large complex program.  However,
      applications should model and handle expected potential errors in
      the automata.

6  Security Considerations

      PIPP addresses potential security issues to by preventing stream
      leaks and stream stomping on the main stream by the sub stream. 
      This is needed as the main stream has no control once the sub
      stream has control.  

      The main stream may allow sub streams to leak and stomp on each
      other, however the main stream has control over that situation. 
      This issue can be handled by language and application design.  A
      more advanced network protocol may also handle this issue by using
      stream numbers created during the handshaking process of a
      connection and designing a connection process for sub streams. 
      PIPP is designed to be a simple, lightweight protocol without a
      connection process of it's own.  Therefore, this issue is outside
      the scope of PIPP.

      A secure transport layer is recommended for use by applications
      communicating instructions and sensitive data.  It is also
      recommended that applications have a separate, unsecured
      connection available to download large, insensitive data such as
      code, images, etc.  A protocol that takes uses caching can be used
      for this.

      Authentication is an issue for applications.  PIPP and sub
      streaming dramatically increased the ability for applications to
      communicate with each other.  It is strongly recommended that each
      application handle its own authentication using standard libraries
      and techniques as opposed to using a single shared authentication
      sign-on application service.  A shared authentication service will
      expose your entire api to all applications apart of the sign-on
      service.  It is more secure to expose a limited api for other
      applications while your application has access to the entire api. 

      Automated, secure communication between software can still be
      achieved by having users explicitly setup public/private key pairs
      to allow communication between two applications.  Once the setup
      is complete, the applications can freely communicate with each
      other.  This way, each connection between applications is verified
 


J. Guerin               Expires December 3, 2011               [Page 11]

INTERNET DRAFT                    PIPP                      June 1, 2011


      by the user.

      All applications need to re-validate security permission on the
      server side for all functions run to guard against attacks by
      outside users or users that are supposed to have limited
      permission.  GUI security is great for usability, but real
      security is applied in the service.  The proof of concepts
      illustrates techniques to do this.

6  IANA Considerations

      At some point, links to run applications will need to be defined
      along with a reserved port for a standard, optimized sub streaming
      protocol.  A new, currently unreserved port should be used leaving
      port 80 for HTTP.

7  References 

8.1  Normative References

   [RFC2119]   S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
               Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3629]   F. Yergeau, "UTF-8, a transformation format of ISO
               10646", RFC 3629, November 2003.

   [RFC5234]   D. Crocker and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
               Specifications: ABNF", RFC 5234, January 2008.


9  Acknowledgements

   "Pay It Proper" is a web site I'm developing as part of an
   experimental economic system based on the idea of rewarding people
   for what they have already done.  I came up with the protocol while
   developing the site.

   Mahalo to all of my friends and family for being supportive.

Author's Addresses


   Jon Guerin
   1215 S. Kihei Rd Suite O-608
   Kihei, HI 96753
   USA

   Phone: +1 808-269-7475
 


J. Guerin               Expires December 3, 2011               [Page 12]

INTERNET DRAFT                    PIPP                      June 1, 2011


   EMail: jguerin@shootingsoul.com


















































J. Guerin               Expires December 3, 2011               [Page 13]
