





DNSEXT Working Group                                       P. Vixie, ISC
INTERNET-DRAFT <draft-vixie-dnsext-dnsshadow-00.txt>
Creation Date: 2010-02-26
Intended Status: Full Standard

               Use of DNS to Carry Configuration Metadata
               Concerning Automatic Replication of Zones

                                Abstract

   Whenever it is desireable to exactly replicated the content of a DNS
   zone into one or more other DNS zones so that the content is
   reachable by multiple names at different zone apexes, it is likewise
   desireable that this behaviour be automated so that cooperating
   primary and secondary nameservers can generate and serve the entire
   set of shadows without human intervention and in an open multivendor
   manner.  This document describes a new CLONE resource record for a
   zone apex which can guide such cooperation.


Status of this Memo
   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 31, 2010.

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.





Expires 2010-08-26                                              [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT                 2010-02-26                     DNS-SHADOW


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

1. Introduction

   1.1. Replication of DNS content so that it is reachable by multiple
   names at different zone apexes requires multiple delegation NS RRsets
   which might be in multiple parent zones (consider VIX.COM vs.
   VIXIE.SF.CA.US).  Parent zone administrators (including registrars
   and registries) and zone administrators (including registrants) can
   use existing tools to maintain these delegations, and the resulting
   NS RRsets will flow through the existing authority servers using
   existing mechanisms such as DNS NOTIFY and DNS IXFR for propagation.

   1.2. Zones replicated in this way must propagate through a
   multivendor network of primary and secondary name servers, even when
   the replication target list changes over time (for example, more
   brands under trademark), in an automated fashion.  New coordinated
   human effort across a network of authority servers every time a zone
   is replicated to a new target namespace should be avoided.

   1.3. The term "Amber zone" will be used to describe the original zone
   whose content is being replicated to new namespaces under different
   apexes.  The term "Shadow zone" will be used to describe the
   replicated zone content as it appear in new namespaces under
   different apexes.

2. Data Model

   2.1. DNS RDATA for RR types not explicitly named in [RFC1035] may be
   opaque to all secondary and recursive servers, and to stub resolvers.
   Only the primary master and the far-end application are required to
   understand an RDATA.  Since some of these RDATA may contain domain
   names relative to the zone apex, the replication of Amber zone data
   toward Shadow zones must be performed on the primary master server.
   Such replication must occur every time a new Shadow target becomes
   known, and the Shadow zones must be updated or regenerated every time
   the corresponding Amber zone is changed.



Expires 2010-08-26                                              [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT                 2010-02-26                     DNS-SHADOW


   2.2. Shadow zone generation and replication might lag slightly behind
   the corresponding Amber zone, but nominally the SOA SERIAL should be
   identical across an Amber zone and its Shadows, and the only
   differences in zone content will be where relative names were used in
   the Amber zone's content and were therefore qualified differently in
   the Shadow zones.  When generating a Shadow zone, the primary master
   will not copy the apex SHADOW RRset, in order to prevent Shadow zones
   from being incorrectly treated as Amber zones.

   2.2.1. For example, if an Amber zone at VIX.COM has a master file
   which describe an apex MX RR with an unqualified MX EXCHANGE domain
   name such as MAIL1, then the MX target in the Amber zone will be
   MAIL1.VIX.COM.  A Shadow of this zone whose apex is VIXIE.SF.CA.US
   will show this MX EXCHANGE as MAIL1.VIXIE.SF.CA.US.  This may require
   configuration changes to supporting applications such as SMTP
   servers.  This behaviour can be prevented by using fully qualified
   names wherever the name of the Amber zone, and not the name of its
   various Shadow zones, is to be published in the RDATA.  Such
   prevention is likely to be important for NS NSDNAMEs whose names are
   within the zone itself, and where the creation of per-Shadow
   nameserver names is an explicit non-goal of the zone administrator.

   2.3. Shadow zone content is propagaged through the authority server
   network using existing DNS protocols such as DNS NOTIFY and DNS IXFR,
   and is retrieved and consumed using existing DNS verbs such as QUERY.
   There are no CNAMEs.  any other indication that the Shadow names are
   not real first class names.  As a result, names within Shadow zones
   can be used as MX EXCHANGE names or NS NSDNAME names or anywhere else
   within DNS that a domain name is the target of an RDATA whose target
   must be a canonical name rather than an alias name.

3. Details

   3.1. In the Amber zone, a SHADOW RRset will enumerate the other zone
   apexes at which it's desired that the zone's content be replicated.
   For example:

      $ORIGIN vix.com.
       ...
      @ IN SHADOW vixie.com.
      @ IN SHADOW vixie.sf.ca.us.
       ...

   This RRset will be propagated normally through the authority server
   network, and will thus be part of the authoritative local data for



Expires 2010-08-26                                              [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT                 2010-02-26                     DNS-SHADOW


   this zone as held by the primary master server and all secondary
   servers.  This RRset will not appear in any Shadow of this Amber
   zone.

   3.2. The primary master server will keep track of what zones contain
   apex SHADOW RRsets and will treat such zones as Amber zones.  Upon
   startup or upon any change to a SHADOW RRset, the primary master
   server will maintain a Shadow zone for each apex SHADOW RR in each
   Amber zone.  Configuration of a Shadow zone will be a copy, along
   with any access-control or other local information, of the
   corresponding Amber zone's configuration.  Content of a Shadow zone
   will be generated by parsing the Amber zone's master file using a
   different default $ORIGIN.  DNS NOTIFY messages will be sent for each
   Shadow zone as and when such content generation process completes.
   Changes to the Amber zone's master file will cause regeneration of
   each associated Shadow zone.  Changes to a master file that involve
   adding or deleting apex SHADOW RRs will cause corresponding changes
   to the list of Shadows of that zones.

   3.3. A secondary nameserver will, upon startup and upon receiving a
   new version of a zone, keep track of what zones contain apex SHADOW
   RRsets, and will treat such as Amber zones.  For each Shadow zone,
   the zone configuration including any access-control or other local
   information will be copied from the associated Amber zone.  This
   means a Shadow zone's master server list will automatically be the
   same as the associated Amber zone's master server list.  Changes to
   an Amber zone that involve adding or deleting apex SHADOW RRs will
   cause corresponding changes to the list of Shadows of that zones.
   There is no other special processing required by secondary server --
   once a Shadow zone has been transferred in the normal way it will be
   served in the normal way, including downstream DNS NOTIFY messages if
   the DNS IXFR/AXFR dependency graph is deep and if this would be done
   for the associated Amber zone.

   3.4. UPDATE messages received by the primary master server whose ZONE
   section or whose implied zone apex is a Shadow zone, shall be
   rejected with error code 9 (NOTAUTH).  This is to avoid the need to
   modify the UPDATE message to change fully qualified names under the
   Shadow zone's apex to be under the Amber zone's apex instead, which
   would be ambiguous since some such names might be intentionally
   within the Shadow zone, and the update may contain new DNSSEC
   signatures for new or changed RRsets.  An update to an Amber zone
   will cause regeneration of each associated Shadow zone.





Expires 2010-08-26                                              [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT                 2010-02-26                     DNS-SHADOW


   3.5. If an Amber zone is signed with DNSSEC, then the signature
   generation process must be available within the context of the
   primary master server.  Thus, whenever it's necessary to generate or
   regenerate a Shadow zone, a normal DNSSEC signing procedure will also
   be done on the resulting Shadow.  This requires that the Shadow zones
   be signed online, with no offline keys or other offline processing.

   3.6. Parent zones must be maintained using existing tools, and do not
   benefit from the new metadata described here.  NS RRsets and DS
   RRsets must be inserted and edited through the normal communication
   channels used by each parent zone (which could involve action by
   registries, registrars, and/or registrants, if a TLD or similar
   shared parent zone is involved).

   3.7. No changes are required for recursive nameservers, stub
   resolvers, or applications.

4. Open Issues

   4.1. Using a different default origin and then not touching fully-
   qualified names is weak.  It plays especially poorly with fully
   dynamic zone content or database back ends.  We either need to tail-
   replace the Amber apex with each Shadow apex, or we need to add new
   signalling somehow.

   4.2. Not allowing updates on shadows is weak.  We should probably
   just outlaw the use of Shadow names within zone content, and do the
   substitution of Shadow apex by Amber apex.  Note that this gets messy
   if the update came with its own DNSSEC metadata for the new or
   modified RRsets.

   4.3. Doing full Shadow regeneration after each UPDATE is weak.  We
   need to figure out some way to, um, shadow the updates.  This gets
   messy if DNSSEC is involved and if the signer is external to the
   primary master server (like if there are offline keys).

   4.4. The Security Considerations section is empty, which seems wrong.

5. Security Considerations

   5.1. Discussion needed.







Expires 2010-08-26                                              [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT                 2010-02-26                     DNS-SHADOW


IANA Considerations

   IANA would have to allocated an RR type code for SHADOW if this goes
   forward.

Normative References

[RFC1035]  P. Mockapetris, "Domain Names - Implementation and
           Specification," RFC 1035, USC/Information Sciences Institute,
           November 1987.

Authors' Addresses

Paul Vixie (text)

     Internet Systems Consortium
     Redwood City, CA, USA
     EMail: vixie@isc.org






























Expires 2010-08-26                                              [Page 6]
