


Network Working Group                                         D. Harkins
Internet-Draft                                            Aruba Networks
Intended status: Informational                          October 18, 2010
Expires: April 21, 2011


     Password-Based Authentication in IKEv2: Selection Criteria and
                             Considerations
               draft-harkins-ipsecme-pake-criteria-01.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 21, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info)
   in effect on the date of publication of this document. Please review
   these documents carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions
   with respect to this document.

Abstract

   The IPsecME working group has been re-chartered.  One of the new
   charter items is to specify a new password-based authentication



Harkins                  Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   Password Based Authentication in IKEv2     October 2010


   method for IKEv2.  This document describes some selection criteria
   and selection considerations for the WG to use.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Selection Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     3.1.  Security  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.2.  Intellectual Property . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.3.  Protocol Co-Existance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   6.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   7.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8


































Harkins                  Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   Password Based Authentication in IKEv2     October 2010


1.  Introduction

   The new IPsecME WG charter defines a new work item on password-based
   authentication for IKEv2.  It says, in part:

      The WG will develop a standards-track extension to IKEv2 to allow
      mutual authentication based on "weak" (low-entropy) shared
      secrets.  The goal is to avoid off-line dictionary attacks without
      requiring the use of certificates or EAP.  There are many already-
      developed algorithms that can be used, and the WG would need to
      pick one that both is believed to be secure and is believed to
      have acceptable intellectual property features.  The WG would also
      need to develop the protocol to use the chosen algorithm in IKEv2
      in a secure fashion.  It is noted up front that this work item
      poses a higher chance of failing to be completed than other WG
      work items; this is balanced by the very high expected value of
      the extension if it is standardized and deployed.

   As noted, there are many algorithms that can satisfy this work item
   and the WG needs to pick one.  This memo describes a set of selection
   critera to consider when making the choice and suggests some
   techniques to use to prevent the process from degenerating.  It is an
   informational memo for the edification of the WG only.  It does not
   presume to be the only way for the WG to arrive at decision.

   This Internet-Draft is not intended to be advanced.  It exists solely
   for easy reference of the criteria on which the WG should base its
   selection decision.  Once that decision has been made this Internet-
   Draft should quietly expire.


2.  Terminology

   This document is entirely non-normative.

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document hold no special significance, certainly not those described
   in [RFC2119].


3.  Selection Considerations

   IKEv2 provides a very high level of security, has no or a very
   negligible cost for licensing, and has a protocol structure that is
   well-understood.  Therefore a new mode to support authentication with
   a possibly low-entropy password/passphrase must be added with great
   care, so as to not unduely affect any of these features.



Harkins                  Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   Password Based Authentication in IKEv2     October 2010


   Candidate protocols must be evaluated against each of these: security
   of the candidate, intellectual property considerations that would
   require licensing of any kind, and how well the candidate fits into
   the existing protocol structure of IKEv2.

3.1.  Security

   Because the charter work item deals with authentication using a low-
   entropy shared secret any candidate protocol has to address the
   security issues of the existing pre-shared key mode in IKE today when
   using a low-entropy secret, and must not introduce any new avenues of
   attack.

   SEC1:  The protocol must be based on a zero-knowledge proof.  It must
          be resistant to passive attack, active attack, and off-line
          dictionary attack.  The only information leaked about the
          secret from a single run of the protocol is a single bit:
          whether the single guess was correct or not.  Another way to
          put this is that the advantage an attacker gets is based on
          interation and not computation.
   SEC2:  The protocol supports perfect forward secrecy and protection
          against the Denning-Sacco attack.
   SEC3:  The protocol does not require the loss of identity protection
          afforded by IKEv2 today.
   SEC4:  The protocol does not constrain the "crypto agility" of IKEv2.
          It must not require fixed and unchangable cryptographic
          primitives or Diffie-Hellman groups.
   SEC5:  The protocol should have received review by the cryptographic
          community, and the more review the better.  The protocol
          should be proven secure under a commonly understood
          cryptographic model.
   SEC6:  The protocol should support the ability to parlay the low-
          entropy secret into a cryptographic-strength credential (such
          as a strong symmetric key or a certificate and private key)
          such that the low-entropy secret need only be used once, or
          very rarely.
   SEC7:  The protocol should be able to store, and use, a transform of
          a password to provide resistance to exposure of the password
          in case of compromise.
   SEC8:  The protocol is secure regardless of the tranforms negotiated
          by IKEv2.  The security properties of the exchange must not
          change depending on the negotiated transforms.

3.2.  Intellectual Property

   Password-authenticated key exchange is an interesting and difficult
   problem.  When a solution is found, there is a natural desire to
   protect the intellectual property unique to the solution and apply



Harkins                  Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   Password Based Authentication in IKEv2     October 2010


   for a patent.  The issue of intellectual property rights (IPR) is a
   large consideration for a solution to this work item due to the
   potential added cost to implementation due to licensing issues.

   [RFC3669] provides some case studies on how IPR has been handled in
   other IETF WGs and has a good section on using IPR as a technology
   evaluation factor.  It can be a useful guide to IPR discussions in
   IPsecME in deciding which protocol to use to satisfy the charter work
   item.

   Patent holders have a financial interest in licensing their
   technology.  This results in claims and counter-claims on whether a
   particular piece of IPR applies or does not apply to a particular
   protocol.  Many of these claims are subjective.  Given that the
   claimant has an obvious motivation for opining a certain way (either
   "yes it does apply" or "no it does not apply") the opinion can be
   suspect.  Discussions can easily reach the point of being pointless
   back-and-forth exchanges because these claimants are not providing
   legal advice on what is, fundamentally, a legal question.

   There are a few things to keep in mind when considering the IPR
   implications of adopting a particular candidate protocol:

   o   Every protocol, even protocols that are already patented, may
       infringe on other patents that are known or unknown.
   o   Licensing of a patent does not provide protection against
       incidential infringment of another patent.
   o   The claims of a patent are what define the IPR.  Descriptive text
       or problem statements that are part of a patent but not part of a
       claim do not describe IPR, but may be used to interpret the
       claims.
   o   Whether a protocol does or does not infringe on a particular
       patent can only be determined by a court, not by cryptographers,
       patent holders, lawyers, or other so-called "experts".
   o   Nothing can prevent you from receiving a threatenting letter from
       a patent holder accusing you of infringing on a some patent.
   o   Patents are time-limited.
   o   Information made public before a given date (so called "prior
       art") may be useful in invalidating claims of a patent.

   A WG reaching some consensus on whether a technology infringes on a
   particular patent, or whether some patent is invalid, is
   inappropriate.  The decision must be arrived at individually by each
   WG member, although each decision will influence support for
   selecting a particular protocol and collectively an impression can be
   made.  Unfortunately, that individual decision may involve resolution
   of competing and fuzzy claims and counter-claims.  As [RFC3669]
   mentions, each WG member should use all legal resources (including



Harkins                  Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   Password Based Authentication in IKEv2     October 2010


   legal counsel) to arrive at a decision whether a particular protocol
   infringes or does not infringe on a particular patent.  The opinion
   of "experts" may be interesting and potentially insightful but is not
   the type of opinion required to make a decision.

   It is important to avoid pointless "yes it does"/"no it doesn't"
   exchanges when evaluating IPR and candidate protocols.  This can be
   done by framing the disussion.  This framing takes two parts.

   First by stating uncontentous facts about the known IPR status of a
   candidate protocol.  These are suggested to be:

   IPR1:  A public description of the protocol was made on <date>.  This
          allows one to determine when applicable patents may expire or
          to determine whether some public information could be
          considered "prior art".
   IPR2:  A patent or patent application on the protocol has been made.
          Or, conversely, no patent or patent application on the
          protocol has been made as of this time.  If the protocol is
          patented this allows one to find out when it will expire.
   IPR3:  An IPR disclosure on this protocol, or a particular
          instantiation of this protocol, has been made to the IETF.
          Or, conversely, no IPR disclosure on this protocol was made
          because, for instance, it is believed to be free of IPR.  This
          is useful in determining a baseline for licensing costs.

   Second, by focusing the discussion of known IPR to address the
   questions that really matter:

   1.  does the claim cover the protocol in question?
   2.  is the claim valid?

   Such discussions are focused and useful if they point out which claim
   from which patent a protocol seems to infringe and, importantly, why.
   Each such statement can become a separate issue around which an
   informative discussion can be had.

   Some kinds of statements should be discouraged.  For example:

   o  Statements which assume one must prove a negative ("show that this
      protocol is patent-free") should be discouraged because such a
      thing is very difficult, if not impossible, to prove.
   o  Broad accusations that a protocol infringes on IPR without listing
      the specific claims from a patent on which it supposedly infringes
      should be discouraged because they can tend to be inflammatory,
      and more importantly, because they do not specifically address the
      important questions.




Harkins                  Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   Password Based Authentication in IKEv2     October 2010


   o  Opinions masquerading as facts ("that claim will never stand up in
      court") should be discouraged or restated ("that claim will be
      very difficult to uphold").

3.3.  Protocol Co-Existance

   IKE is a request/response protocol with role enforcement (there is an
   "initiator" and a "responder").  It negotiates a slew of parameters
   that govern how it will complete.  It provides mutual authentication
   and derivation of a secret known only to the authenticated peers.  It
   can trade off the strength of the derived key for computation and
   time costs.  It creates and manages security associations that define
   how to communicate between peers.  These are all well understood and
   well-analyzed features of IKE.  Addition of new modes of
   authentication must be done harmoniously, keeping in mind the
   existing structure and nature of IKE.

   Co-existance considerations must be taken into account when
   discussing candidate protocols.  These include:

   MISC1:   How many additional round trips does the protocol add to the
            existing exchange?
   MISC2:   How much additional computation (e.g. exponentiation) must
            be performed for each exchange because of the protocol?
   MISC3:   Does performance differ depending on whether the secret is a
            large, random octet string or a character string?
   MISC4:   Can internationalization of character-based passwords be
            supported?
   MISC5:   Can the protocol use the same finite cyclic groups (MODP,
            EC2N, ECP) used in IKEv2 or does it require a new IANA
            registry or additions of special groups to the existing IANA
            registry?
   MISC6:   Does the protocol fit into the request/response nature of
            IKE or are additional messages required to "sync" the two
            peers back up?
   MISC7:   What additional negotiation, if any, is required to use this
            protocol?
   MISC8:   Does the the protocol require a trusted third party or clock
            synchronization to successfully complete?
   MISC9:   Does the protocol require the use of certain cryptographic
            primitives-- hash functions, ciphers, finite cyclic groups--
            or is it "crypto-agile"?
   MISC10:  Does the protocol support the use of elliptic curve
            cryptography or only finite field cryptography?







Harkins                  Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   Password Based Authentication in IKEv2     October 2010


   MISC11:  Can the protocol be easily implemented?


4.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require any action by IANA.


5.  Security Considerations

   This document does not define any new protocol, and has no inherent
   security considerations.  It does discuss criteria for the selection
   of a security protocol, chief among them being security.


6.  Acknowledgments

   The author would like to thank Yaron Sheffer and Paul Hoffman for the
   email exchanges the caused this document to be written.  It was
   motivated by Yaron's draft of a similar name.


7.  Informative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC3669]  Brim, S., "Guidelines for Working Groups on Intellectual
              Property Issues", RFC 3669, February 2004.


Author's Address

   Dan Harkins
   Aruba Networks
   1322 Crossman Avenue
   Sunnyvale, CA  94089-1113
   United States of America

   Email: dharkins@arubanetworks.com











Harkins                  Expires April 21, 2011                 [Page 8]

