


Internet Engineering Task Force                          P. Hallam-Baker
Internet-Draft                                                  B. Smith
Intended status: Informational                               Comodo Inc.
Expires: September 10, 2011                                March 9, 2011


             DNS Extended Service Discovery (ESRV) Record.
                       draft-hallambaker-esrv-01

Abstract

   General Service Description (GSRV) and Extended Service Description
   records are DNS Resource Records that provide information to
   applications attempting to establish a network connection.  When
   authenticated using an appropriate means GSRV and ESRV records may be
   used to prevent a downgrade attack in cases where use of security
   enhancements with an application protocol are optional.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  This document may not be modified,
   and derivative works of it may not be created, except to format it
   for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 10, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Hallam-Baker & Smith   Expires September 10, 2011               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft   DNS Extended Service Parameters (ESRV)       March 2011


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Requirements Language  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  Extended Service Discription . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  Use of DNS Prefixing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
       2.1.1.  Interaction with Extended Service Discovery  . . . . .  5
       2.1.2.  Abstract Services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     2.2.  Resolution Mechanism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       2.2.1.  Incremental Mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
         2.2.1.1.  Domain Resolution  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
         2.2.1.2.  Service Resolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
         2.2.1.3.  Instance Resolution  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       2.2.2.  Optimized Mode . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
         2.2.2.1.  EDNS0 Meta-Query Extension . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       2.2.3.  Interactive HTTP Properties  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     2.3.  Syntax . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
       2.3.1.  Presentation Format  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     2.4.  ESRV Processing Rules  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       2.4.1.  Service Discovery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
       2.4.2.  Abstract Service Discovery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   3.  Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     3.1.  Property Values  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     3.2.  Processing Properties  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     3.3.  Discovery Properties . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     3.4.  Security Properties  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
       3.4.1.  tls_specifier Attributes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   4.  Relation to Existing Work  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   5.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
     7.2.  Non-Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19











Hallam-Baker & Smith   Expires September 10, 2011               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft   DNS Extended Service Parameters (ESRV)       March 2011


1.  Definitions

   The following definitions are used in this document:

   Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1)  A notation for describing
      abstract types and values, as specified in X.680 [X.680].

   Authorization Entry  An authorization assertion that grants or denies
      a specific set of permissions to a specific group of entities.

   Canonical Domain Name  A Domain Name that is not an alias.

   Canonical Domain Name Value  The value of a Canonical Domain Name.
      The value resulting from applying alias transformations to a
      Domain Name that is not canonical.

   Certificate  An X.509 Certificate, as specified in RFC 5280
      [RFC5280].

   Certification Policy (CP)  Specifies the criteria that a
      Certification Authority undertakes to meet in its issue of
      certificates.

   Certification Practices Statement (CPS)  Specifies the means by which
      the criteria of the Certification Policy are met.  In most cases
      this will be the document against which the operations of the
      Certification Authority are audited.

   Certification Authority (CA)  An entity that issues Certificates in
      accordance with a specified Certification Policy.

   Distinguished Encoding Rules (DER)  A set of rules for encoding ASN.1
      objects, as specified in X.690 [X.690].

   Domain  The set of resources associated with a DNS Domain Name.

   Domain Name  A DNS Domain name as specified in RFC 1035 [RFC1035] and
      revisions.

   Domain Name System (DNS)  The Internet naming system specified in RFC
      1035 [RFC1035] and revisions.

   DNS Security (DNSSEC)  Extensions to the DNS that provide
      authentication services as specified in RFC 4033 [RFC4033] and
      revisions.






Hallam-Baker & Smith   Expires September 10, 2011               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft   DNS Extended Service Parameters (ESRV)       March 2011


   Public Delegation Point  A Domain Name that is obtained from a public
      DNS registry as defined by a Certification Policy.

   Public Key Infrastructure X.509 (PKIX)  Standards and specifications
      issued by the IETF that apply the X.509 [X.509] certificate
      standards specified by the ITU to Internet applications as
      specified in RFC 5280 [RFC5280] and related documents.

   Resource Record (RR)  A set of attributes bound to a Domain Name.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


2.  Extended Service Discription

   General Service Description (GSRV) and Extended Service Discrpition
   (ESRV) DNS Resource Records provide a mechanism for specifying
   properties relating to Internet services associated with a DNS name.

   GSRV and ESRV records are intended to serve the same function at
   different levels of generality.  GSRV records specify properties that
   apply to all Internet services provided in the Domain.  ESRV records
   are used to specify properties that apply to finer levels of detail.

   Extended Service Description allows properties to be expressed at
   three levels of granularity:

   Domain  Properties that apply to all services offered at the
      corresponding domain name.  Domain level properties do not take
      prefixes and are published using the GSRV Resource Record.

      For example, a site might declare that all services offered at a
      domain name support use of SRV service discovery.

   Service  Properties that apply to all instances of a service offered
      at the corresponding domain name.  Service level properties always
      take a service specific prefix and are published using the ESRV
      Resource Record.

      For example, a site might specify that the SMTP service always
      supports use of the TLS security protocol (via the STARTTLS
      mechanism) while use of the TLS security protocol is required for
      IMAP, POP and HTTP connections.




Hallam-Baker & Smith   Expires September 10, 2011               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft   DNS Extended Service Parameters (ESRV)       March 2011


   Instance  Properties that apply to a specific instance of a service
      on a specific host listening on a specific port.  Instance level
      properties always take a service specific prefix and a port
      specific prefix and are published using the ESRV Resource Record.

      Declaration of Instance specific properties is only possible when
      a DNS service discovery protocol such as MX, SRV, NAPTR or DDDS is
      in use.

      For example a site with two servers offering SMTP email service
      might advertise different TLS certificates for each service
      instance.

2.1.  Use of DNS Prefixing

   GRSV/ESRV records make use of the service prefixing mechanism
   introduced in SRV and employed in later advanced service discovery
   mechanisms such as NAPTR and URI.

   The need for separate DNS Resource Record types to express properties
   at different levels of granularity arises from the need to support
   use of wildcards and DNS aliases such as CNAME and DNAME records when
   specifying properties that apply to a whole domain and the need to
   use prefix labels to specify properties at finer granularity.

2.1.1.  Interaction with Extended Service Discovery

   The GSRV/ESRV discovery mechanism is designed for use by itself or in
   combination with service discovery mechanisms such as SRV, NAPTR and
   URI.

   One of the main limitations of service discovery schemes such as SRV,
   NAPTR and URI is that they can only be used if a client knows to look
   for them.

   Without provision for meta-service discovery, the service discovery
   mechanisms supported by a protocol are limited to those which exist
   at the time the protocol is developed and that the protocol designer
   decides to support.  In most cases however, it is the site
   administrator rather than the protocol designer who is best placed to
   know which form of extended discovery is most applicable to their
   service.

   GSRV records may be used to inform clients that a service discovery
   mechanism is supported for specific protocols or for all protocols.
   In the following example clients are advised to attempt service
   discovery using the SRV mechanism for the HTTP protocol and to
   attempt URI service discovery for all others:



Hallam-Baker & Smith   Expires September 10, 2011               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft   DNS Extended Service Parameters (ESRV)       March 2011


       example.com   GSRV 0   srv  "_http._tcp"
       example.com   GSRV 0   uri "*"

2.1.2.  Abstract Services

   Publication of ESRV properties for abstract services allows a site to
   enable clients to perform protocol negotiation by specifying the
   range of services offered that support a specific purpose.

   For example, the SMTP, POP3 and IMAP4 protocols are all used for
   exchange of mail.  An abstract service for the mail protocol with the
   prefix '_mail._as' allows clients to discover the full range of mail
   related protocols in a single query.


   example.com             GSRV 0  service "_mail._as"
   _mail._as.example.com   ESRV 0  prot "_smtp._tcp"
   _mail._as.example.com   ESRV 0  prot "_pop._tcp"
   _mail._as.example.com   ESRV 0  prot "_imap._tcp"

2.2.  Resolution Mechanism

   Extended Service description records MAY be resolved in an
   Incremental mode or an Optimized mode.  Incremental mode allows
   records to be advertised and resolved by existing DNS servers,
   optimized mode allows for improved performance when

   Implementations MUST support the Incremental mode and MAY support the
   Optimized mode.

2.2.1.  Incremental Mode

   The incremental mode allows extended service discovery to be used in
   conjunction with DNS resolvers that do not support the Optimized
   mode.

2.2.1.1.  Domain Resolution

   In the incremental mode the DNS client attempting service discovery
   begins by querying for Domain level properties.

   For example, a client attempting to perform extended service
   discovery for the HTTP protocol server at www.example.com would begin
   by querying for the GSRV record at www.example.com.

   Domain properties MAY include property entries for the service
   property type.  The service property entry indicates that additional
   property entries are specified at the service level for either a



Hallam-Baker & Smith   Expires September 10, 2011               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft   DNS Extended Service Parameters (ESRV)       March 2011


   specific serviceby means of the protocol prefix or for all services
   by means of the wildcard entry "*".

2.2.1.2.  Service Resolution

   If the domain resolution indicates that property entries are declared
   for the service prefix being resolved or for the wildcard prefix
   type, service level resolution is performed.

   There are three possible outcomes in which the query is successful
   and returns a GSRV record:

      The queried domain name is canonical and a GSRV record is returned
      for that domain name.

      The queried domain name is not canonical and an alias is returned
      (e.g.  CNAME) together with the GSRV record for the canonical
      name.

      The queried domain name does not exist but is in the scope of a
      wildcard record.

   In the last case we require that the GSRV record set returned contain
   a canonical property entry specifying a canonical name.  We are thus
   assured that

   prefix the canonical name to perform the service lookup

   In the following example a query for the _prefix protocol at domain
   names canonical.example.com, cname.example.com or
   wildcard.example.com will all result in the resolution process
   continuing with a query for an ESRV record for
   _prefix.canonical.example.com.


   $ORIGIN example.com
   canonical          GSRV 0  service "*"
   cname.example.com  CNAME canonical.example.com
   *.example.com      GSRV 0  canonical "canonical.example.com"
   *.example.com      GSRV 0  service "*"

   If use of a service discovery mechanism is indicated a site MAY
   choose to advertise properties specific to a particular service
   instance through use of the instance property type.







Hallam-Baker & Smith   Expires September 10, 2011               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft   DNS Extended Service Parameters (ESRV)       March 2011


2.2.1.2.1.  Prefetching of Protocol Records

   Client implementations MAY attempt to optimize incremental mode
   discovery by initiating service resolution in parallel with domain
   resolution by applying the protocol prefix to the query domain.

   If the response to the domain resolution query indicates that the
   query domain is not-canonical, any answer returned to the pre-fetched
   query is ignored and a new query made if inidcated by the answer
   returned to the domain resolution query.

2.2.1.3.  Instance Resolution

   If the service level resolution indicates that instance level
   property entries MAY exist, these are resolved by querying for the
   chosen host name prefixed by the service prefix and a second prefix
   formed from the decimal port identifier.

   For example a the www.example.com HTTP server is supported by two
   separate service instances (host1, host2).  TLS security is always
   offered on host1 instance but not on host2:


   $ORIGIN example.com
   www                    GSRV 0 service "*"
   www                    GSRV 0 srv "_http._tcp"
   _http._tcp.www         ESRV 0 instance ""
   _http._tcp.www         SRV 1 1 80 host1.example.com
   _http._tcp.www         SRV 1 1 80 host2.example.com
   _http._tcp._80.host1   ESRV 0 tls "required"

2.2.2.  Optimized Mode

   DNS servers MAY advertise support for the optimized mode query by
   means of the EDNS0 meta-query extension.

   When optimized mode queries are supported, the client MAY present a
   meta-query consisting of the protocol prefix concatenated to an
   iteration count concatenated to the query domain.  The server
   receiving the query then performs the GSRV/ESRV discovery process on
   the client's behalf and returns the whole result chain in a single
   response.

   For example, a query for the HTTP service at example.com would be
   made as:


   METASRV ? _http._tcp._0.www.example.com



Hallam-Baker & Smith   Expires September 10, 2011               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft   DNS Extended Service Parameters (ESRV)       March 2011


   Since the two hosts have the same weighting, there is a 50%
   probability that the response to this query would be:


   _http._tcp._0.www.example.com METASRV 2
   www.example.com               GSRV 0 service "*"
   www.example.com               GSRV 0 srv "_http._tcp"
   _http._tcp.www.example.com    ESRV 0  instance ""
   _http._tcp.www.example.com    SRV 1 1 80 host2.example.com
   _http._tcp._80.host1          ESRV 0  tls "required"


   Should the attempt to connect to host1.example.com fail, the client
   MAY make a second attempt:


   METASRV ? _http._tcp._1.www.example.com

   Since there is now only one service instance remaining, the response
   would be:


   _http._tcp._1.www.example.com METASRV 2
   www.example.com               GSRV 0  service "*"
   www.example.com               GSRV 0  srv "_http._tcp"
   _http._tcp.www.example.com    ESRV 0  instance ""
   _http._tcp.www.example.com    SRV 1 1 80 host1.example.com
   _http._tcp._80.host1          ESRV 0  tls "required"


   [TBS: work out how to allow the server to calculate the random number
   deterministically on the query, may need to add a state parameter
   here.]

2.2.2.1.  EDNS0 Meta-Query Extension

   The EDNS0 Meta-Query extension has code TBS and is used to advertise
   support for one or more meta-queries.

   The parameter data for the Meta-Query Extension consists of a list of
   DNS query numbers for the supported meta queries.

2.2.3.  Interactive HTTP Properties

   Interactive HTTP Attributes are properties specific to the HTTP
   protocol that are declared as Domain Properties rather than service
   properties.  Specifying the properties for HTTP as interactive HTTP
   properties allows clients using resolvers that do not support the



Hallam-Baker & Smith   Expires September 10, 2011               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft   DNS Extended Service Parameters (ESRV)       March 2011


   optimized resolution mode to resolve HTTP properties in a single
   round trip rather than two.

   For example, the following configuration specifies that tls is always
   offered for the application protocols HTTP and POP.


   $ORIGIN example.com
   .                      GSRV 0  service "*"
   .                      GSRV 0  http_tls "required"
   _pop._tcp              ESRV 0  tls "offered"


   The above example is functionally equivalent to specifying the HTTP
   properties as instance properties:


   $ORIGIN example.com
   .                      GSRV 0  service "*"
   _http._tcp             ESRV 0  tls "required"
   _pop._tcp              ESRV 0  tls "offered"


   Special provision is justified in this instance by the widespread use
   of HTTP and the effect that service discovery latency has on the Web
   Browser user experience.

2.3.  Syntax

   The GSRV and ESRV have the same record syntax which is the same as
   the syntax of the CAA record.  A GSRV or ESRV RR contains a single
   property entry consisting of a tag value pair.  Each tag represents a
   property of the CAA record.  The value of a property entry is that
   specified in the corresponding value field.

   A domain name MAY have multiple GSRV or ESRV RRs associated with it
   and a given property MAY be specified more than once.  Where multiple
   properties are specified they are additive.  That is if SRV and URI
   records are advertised for a service then both mechanisms for
   advanced discovery are offered.

   The GSRV/ESRV data field consists of a sequence of at least one
   property entry.  Each property entry consists of a sequence of:








Hallam-Baker & Smith   Expires September 10, 2011              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft   DNS Extended Service Parameters (ESRV)       March 2011


   Flags  One octet containing the following field:

      Bit 0: Critical Flag  If the value is set (1), the critical flag
         is asserted and the property MUST be understood if the record
         is to be correctly processed.

      Note that according to the conventions set out in RFC 1035
      [RFC1035] Bit 0 is the Most Significant Bit and Bit 7 is the Least
      Significant.  Thus a flags value of 0x51 indicates a tag length of
      5 octets and that the property entry is not critical and is not to
      be used for relying party processing.

   Tag Length  A single octet containing an unsigned integer specifying
      the tag length in octets.  The tag length MUST be at least 1 and
      SHOULD be no more than 15.

   Tag  The property identifier, a sequence of ASCII characters.

      Tag values MAY contain ASCII characters a through z and the
      numbers 0 through 9.  Tag values MUST NOT contain any other
      characters.  Matching of tag values is case insensitive.

   Value  A sequence of octets representing the property value.
      Property values are encoded as binary values and MAY employ sub-
      formats.

      The length of the value field is specified implicitly as the
      remaining length of the enclosing Resource Record data field.

2.3.1.  Presentation Format

   The presentation format of the GSRV and ESRV resource records is as
   follows:

   GSRV <flags> <tag> <data>

   ESRV <flags> <tag> <data>

   Where:

   flags  Is an unsigned integer between 0 and 15.

   tag  Is a non-zero sequence of ASCII letter and numbers in lower
      case.







Hallam-Baker & Smith   Expires September 10, 2011              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft   DNS Extended Service Parameters (ESRV)       March 2011


   data  The parameter data for the property specified as either a
      quoted text string or an unquoted Base64 Encoding [RFC4648] of the
      value.

2.4.  ESRV Processing Rules

   The purpose of extended service discovery is to refine an abstract
   specification of a DNS host name and protocol prefix to a concrete
   specification for the name of a specific network host, a specific
   network port number and a specific network protocol and associated
   protocol parameters.

2.4.1.  Service Discovery

   The GSRV and ESRV Resource Record is used in combination with service
   discovery records (e.g.  SRV, URI NAPTR) to perform extended service
   discovery.  An API call for extended service discovery has the
   following signature:

   name (input/output)  The DNS name of the service.

   protocol (input/output)  The DNS prefix of the protocol.

   port (output)  The IP port number to conect to at the host

   uri (output)  The canonical uri of the service to connect to

   properties (output)  A list of attribute value pairs that specify
      characteristics of the connection to the service.

2.4.2.  Abstract Service Discovery

   The GSRV and ESRV Resource Records may be used to perform abstract
   service discovery providing a list of supported protocols that
   implement the abstract service.  An API call for abstract service
   discovery has the following signature:

   name (input/output)  The DNS name of the service.

   protocol (input)  The DNS prefix of the abstract protocol.

   implementations (output)  A list of DNS prefixes for the protocols
      implementing the specified protocol that are supported at the
      specified domain.







Hallam-Baker & Smith   Expires September 10, 2011              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft   DNS Extended Service Parameters (ESRV)       March 2011


3.  Properties

3.1.  Property Values

   GSRV/ESRV properties take different parameter values according to the
   specific label.

   [domain_name]  A DNS domain name.

   [protocol_specifier]  An ASCII string containing a protocol prefix
      string or the wildcard character '*'.

   [tls_specifier]  A sequence of one or more TLS attributes or
      attribute value pairs.

3.2.  Processing Properties

   Processing properties direct the process of property resolution.
   Since a processing property is used to direct the resolution process,
   they only have effect when encountered at a relevant stage of
   resolution.  A service property that directs a client to resolve for
   service properties has no effect.

   Three processing properties are defined.

   canonical [domain_name]  The canonical property directs the client to
      use the specified property value as the canonical domain name to
      be used in service resolution.

      The canonical property only has effect if declared as a domain
      property.

   service [protocol_specifier]  The service property directs the client
      to perform service resolution if the property value matches the
      query protocol.

      The service property only has effect if declared as a domain
      property.

   instance [protocol_specifier]  The service property directs the
      client to perform instance resolution if the property value
      matches the query protocol.

      The instance property only has effect if declared as a domain
      property or as a service property.






Hallam-Baker & Smith   Expires September 10, 2011              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft   DNS Extended Service Parameters (ESRV)       March 2011


3.3.  Discovery Properties

   Discovery Properties specify the resolution mechanism(s) to be used
   for service resolution.  Discovery properties only have effect when
   encountered in the Domain resolution phase and always take a
   protocol_specifier as the property type.

   If multiple discovery properties are specified, the most specific
   property or properties are to be used.

   If no discovery property is specified, 'a' record service discovery
   (i.e.  IPv4) is indicated.

   a [protocol_specifier]  Specifies discovery by means of A record
      lookup; the traditional means of service resolution for IPv4.

      Since A record lookup is the default, this property is most likely
      to be used to specify a protocol specific exception to a wildcard
      discovery property.

   aaaa [protocol_specifier]  Specifies discovery by means of AAAA
      record lookup; the traditional means of service resolution for
      IPv6.

   srv [protocol_specifier]  Specifies discovery using the SRV service
      discovery mechanism.

   uri [protocol_specifier]  Specifies discovery using the URI service
      discovery mechanism.

   naptr [protocol_specifier]  Reserved for specifying discovery using
      the URI service discovery mechanism.

      Since NAPTR records are designed to support URN resolution rather
      than service resolution, the manner of using NAPTR records within
      the GSRV/ESRV framework is left unspecified in this version of the
      specification.

   prot [protocol_specifier]  Specifies that the specified protocol MAY
      be resolved to discover a protocol related to the specified
      protocol.

      The prot Discovery Property is used to support abstract service
      resolution and alternative service resolution.  When encountered
      in the domain resolution phase, the prot property advises the
      resolver that an alternative to the requested protocol is
      available.




Hallam-Baker & Smith   Expires September 10, 2011              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft   DNS Extended Service Parameters (ESRV)       March 2011


      In the case of an abstract protocol such as a prefix representing
      'email', there is no concrete service to resolve and the only
      discovery properties that are valid are prot discovery properties.

      In the case of a concrete protocol such as _http._tcp, a prot
      specifier MAY be used to advise the resolver that use of an
      alternative protocol is available (e.g. _httpng._tcp).

3.4.  Security Properties

   Security properties allow a service provider to describe the security
   critieria for a service.  When an ESRV record is secured using an
   appropriate means (e.g.  DNSSEC), the security properties MAY be used
   to prevent a downgrade attack on the security enhancements offered.

   tls [tls_specifier]  Specifies the use of tls.  Valid property values
      are refused, optional and required.

      If the property value refused is specified, the corresponding
      service does not support use of the TLS security enhancement.

      If the property value optional is specified, the corresponding
      service always offers use of the TLS security enhancement.

      If the property value optional is specified, the corresponding
      service requires of use of the TLS security enhancement.

   http-tls [tls_specifier]  Specifies the use of tls with HTTP.  Valid
      values are refused, optional and required with the same semantics
      as for the tis property.

      The http-tls property allows security properties to be declared
      for the http protocol as domain properties, thus allowing the
      properties to be resolved in a single round trip.

   It is anticipated that the list of tags will be expanded at a future
   date to support other Internet security protocols such as IPSEC and
   WS-Security.

3.4.1.  tls_specifier Attributes

   A tls_specifier property value consists of a sequence of case
   insensitive atributes or attribute-value pairs separated by spaces as
   follows:

   [EBNF To Be Specified]





Hallam-Baker & Smith   Expires September 10, 2011              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft   DNS Extended Service Parameters (ESRV)       March 2011


   refused  The specified service or service instance does not support
      TLS.

   optional[=<port]>  The specified service or service instance always
      offered on an alternative IP port but does not require use of TLS.

      If the port parameter is specified, it speficies the port number
      for the TLS service in decimal.

      If no port number is specified the TLS service is provided on the
      default port for using TLS with the specified protocol.

   required[=<port]>  The specified service or service instance requires
      use of TLS.

      If the port parameter is specified, it speficies the port number
      for the TLS service in decimal.

      If no port number is specified the TLS service is provided on the
      default port for using TLS with the specified protocol.

   upgrade  The specified service or service instance always accepts a
      client request to upgrade the connection to use TLS.


4.  Relation to Existing Work

   Extended Service Discrpition (ESRV) DNS Resource Records extend the
   principles of named service discovery first proposed in SRV RFC 2782
   [RFC2782] and later extended in NAPTR RFC 3403 [RFC3403] and related
   specifications.  The ESRV record provides an extensible container
   that MAY be used to provide a description of an abstract Internet
   service bound to a domain name or a specific instance of that
   Internet Service on a specific host.

   Existing SRV records provide a means of allowing a client to discover
   a host and port number for a specific Internet protocol.  ESRV
   records allow a further layer of abstraction in which the discovery
   is of an Internet Service and the service provider MAY declare a
   range of supported protocol options.

   For example, POP RFC 1939 [RFC1939] and IMAP RFC 2060 [RFC2060] both
   provide means by which a mail client can access mail messages but the
   only means by which a client might discover that both protocols are
   supported is to attempt to connect to each in turn.

   Although discovery by polling is practical when there are only two
   options, it is impractical in application areas such as federated



Hallam-Baker & Smith   Expires September 10, 2011              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft   DNS Extended Service Parameters (ESRV)       March 2011


   authentication (also known as 'identity') where the number of
   protocols that might be employed is very large (e.g.  Kerberos, SAML,
   OpenID, etc.) and the number of ways in which those protocols might
   be employed is even larger still.  Not only is polling inefficient in
   such circumstances, a client that fails to find a means of connection
   has no way to know how it might have succeeded.

   ESRV records provide a means by which Internet clients and Servers
   can negotiate choice of protocols and protocol properties.  In
   particular, when publication of the ESRV record is appropriately
   secure (e.g. through a use of DNSSEC RFC 4033 [RFC4033]), the ESRV
   record provides a means of securely negotiating critical security
   properties.

   Today use of Internet security is the exception rather than the rule.
   As a result, an attacker can frequently bypass security enhancements
   by persuading the parties that they do not exist.

   This form of attack is a downgrade attack.  While protocols such as
   SSL RFC 5246 [RFC5246] and S/MIME have measures that are intended to
   prevent downgrade attacks in which weaker algorithms are substituted
   for strong, there is currently no in-band mechanism for specifying
   that these enhancements are available or that they should or must be
   used.

   While it is possible to infer such information from existing DNS
   records such as the port number specification in an SRV record, such
   approaches represent heuristics and as such are not appropriate as a
   means of achieving an essential security objective.


5.  Security Considerations

   TBS


6.  IANA Considerations

   TBS


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.




Hallam-Baker & Smith   Expires September 10, 2011              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft   DNS Extended Service Parameters (ESRV)       March 2011


   [RFC2782]  Gulbrandsen, A., Vixie, P., and L. Esibov, "A DNS RR for
              specifying the location of services (DNS SRV)", RFC 2782,
              February 2000.

   [RFC3403]  Mealling, M., "Dynamic Delegation Discovery System (DDDS)
              Part Three: The Domain Name System (DNS) Database",
              RFC 3403, October 2002.

   [RFC4648]  Josefsson, S., "The Base16, Base32, and Base64 Data
              Encodings", RFC 4648, October 2006.

   [RFC4871]  Allman, E., Callas, J., Delany, M., Libbey, M., Fenton,
              J., and M. Thomas, "DomainKeys Identified Mail (DKIM)
              Signatures", RFC 4871, May 2007.

   [RFC5246]  Dierks, T. and E. Rescorla, "The Transport Layer Security
              (TLS) Protocol Version 1.2", RFC 5246, August 2008.

   [RFC5280]  Cooper, D., Santesson, S., Farrell, S., Boeyen, S.,
              Housley, R., and W. Polk, "Internet X.509 Public Key
              Infrastructure Certificate and Certificate Revocation List
              (CRL) Profile", RFC 5280, May 2008.

   [X.509]    International Telecommunication Union, "ITU-T
              Recommendation X.509 (11/2008): Information technology -
              Open systems interconnection - The Directory: Public-key
              and attribute certificate frameworks", ITU-T
              Recommendation X.509, November 2008.

   [X.680]    International Telecommunication Union, "ITU-T
              Recommendation X.680 (11/2008): Information technology -
              Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1): Specification of
              basic notation", ITU-T Recommendation X.680,
              November 2008.

   [X.690]    International Telecommunication Union, "ITU-T
              Recommendation X.690 (11/2008): Information technology -
              Abstract Syntax Notation One (ASN.1): Specification of
              Basic Encoding Rules (BER), Canonical Encoding Rules (CER)
              and Distinguished Encoding Rules (DER)", ITU-T
              Recommendation X.690, November 2008.

7.2.  Non-Normative References

   [RFC1035]  Mockapetris, P., "Domain names - implementation and
              specification", STD 13, RFC 1035, November 1987.

   [RFC1939]  Myers, J. and M. Rose, "Post Office Protocol - Version 3",



Hallam-Baker & Smith   Expires September 10, 2011              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft   DNS Extended Service Parameters (ESRV)       March 2011


              STD 53, RFC 1939, May 1996.

   [RFC2060]  Crispin, M., "Internet Message Access Protocol - Version
              4rev1", RFC 2060, December 1996.

   [RFC2905]  Vollbrecht, J., Calhoun, P., Farrell, S., Gommans, L.,
              Gross, G., de Bruijn, B., de Laat, C., Holdrege, M., and
              D. Spence, "AAA Authorization Application Examples",
              RFC 2905, August 2000.

   [RFC3851]  Ramsdell, B., "Secure/Multipurpose Internet Mail
              Extensions (S/MIME) Version 3.1 Message Specification",
              RFC 3851, July 2004.

   [RFC4033]  Arends, R., Austein, R., Larson, M., Massey, D., and S.
              Rose, "DNS Security Introduction and Requirements",
              RFC 4033, March 2005.


Authors' Addresses

   Phillip Hallam-Baker
   Comodo Inc.

   Email: philliph@comodo.com


   Brian Smith
   Comodo Inc.

   Email: brian@dns.com




















Hallam-Baker & Smith   Expires September 10, 2011              [Page 19]


