Networking Working Group                                   M. Vigoureux
Internet Draft                                           Alcatel-Lucent
Intended status: Informational                                  D. King
Expires: May 2014                                    Old Dog Consulting

                                                       November 5, 2013



                 Working Group Secretaries Good Practices
                    draft-secretaries-good-practices-01


Abstract

   This document is primarily intended for Working Group Secretaries,
   the role of whom is defined in RFC 2418, but also for Working Group
   Chairs to better apprehend the value of Working Group Secretaries.
   This document complements the succinct description of Working Group
   Secretaries' role by providing a compilation of good practices and
   some general guidelines regarding the fulfillment of the role.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
   groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress".

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 5, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors. All rights reserved.



WG Secretaries           Expires May 5, 2014                   [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      WG Secretaries Good Practices         November 2013


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document. Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.

Table of Contents

   1. Introduction...................................................2
   2. An IETF Meeting................................................3
      2.1. Preparation Phase.........................................3
      2.2. A Working Group Session...................................5
      2.3. Conclusion of an IETF Meeting.............................6
   3. Inter-Meeting Phase............................................6
   4. Security Considerations........................................8
   5. IANA Considerations............................................8
   6. Conclusions....................................................8
   7. References.....................................................8
      7.1. Informative References....................................8
   8. Acknowledgments................................................9

1. Introduction

   The Working Group (WG) Secretarial role was defined as a minute taker
   and to record WG discussion points and decisions (see RFC 2418 [1]).
   Over time, this role has evolved to include a number of additional
   functions and activities which are critical to the smooth operation
   of IETF WGs. This document describes these additional functions and
   activities. However, the framework, and perimeter of action,
   associated to the WG Secretary function depends on the person
   ensuring the function and on the persons he or she collaborates with
   (i.e., the WG Chairs), as well as on the professional relationship
   they establish. Therefore this document does not list what must be
   done, but what could be done by a WG Secretary. Also, this list shall
   not be considered as exhaustive. This document is therefore not a
   rigid job description.

   It is essential that overtime the WG Secretary and Chairs build a
   trust based efficient working relationship, and that, where required,
   the WG Secretary develops the knowledge to fulfil the additional
   functions and activities. This shall enable the WG Secretary to both
   extend the scope of his or her actions, thus reducing the number of
   administrative tasks the Chairs might be expected to manage, and to
   be more and more involved in WG operation and decision-making, to the
   extent desired, or required. No secret recipe is given here on how to
   effectively build such relationship. In any case, while WG Chairs may


WG Secretaries           Expires May 5, 2014                   [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      WG Secretaries Good Practices         November 2013


   delegate a number of tasks to the Secretary, they maintain the
   overall responsibility over the WG and the decisions and actions that
   are taken. As such, it is recommended that the WG Secretary does not
   operate without the agreement of the Chairs, or at least without the
   confidence that his or her choices and actions are in line with the
   Chairs views on any given matter.

   It shall be noted that the IETF Secretariat as well as a certain
   number of tools and means, exist in support of WG operation (session
   request tool, meeting material manager, the Datatracker, ...). Most
   (if not all) of these are accessible from the WG Chairs' page
   (http://www.ietf.org/wg/chairs-page.html). However, it is out of the
   scope of this document to describe the use of these tools. It shall
   also be noted that no specific tool exists in support of certain
   actions and tasks that can fall under the responsibility of WG
   Secretaries.

   Also, certain tasks described herein require the use of credentials
   and some rights associated to these. The WG Secretary (with the
   necessary help from the Chairs) should make sure he or she has all
   the capabilities required to perform the various tasks.

   We classify the objectives and tasks of a WG Secretary according two
   distinct phases: an IETF meeting, and the period between two
   consecutive IETF meetings. The following two sections reflect that
   classification.

2. An IETF Meeting

   This phase in fact covers the period of an IETF meeting per se, as
   well as the preparation phase and conclusion phase of a WG session.

2.1. Preparation Phase

   In a (non absolute) chronological order, the tasks of a WG Secretary
   could consist in:

   o  Submitting a session request for the WG.

   The WG Secretary could submit a request for a WG session at the
   upcoming IETF meeting, using the means available. The WG Secretary
   should coordinate with the Chairs in order to appropriately fill the
   submission form, especially with regards to the number of sessions to
   request for, and their respective duration.

   o  Calling for presentation slots.



WG Secretaries           Expires May 5, 2014                   [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      WG Secretaries Good Practices         November 2013


   As soon as the IETF agenda for a given meeting is published, the WG
   Secretary could send an e-mail to the WG mailing list asking the WG
   participants to submit requests for presentation slots at the
   upcoming WG session(s). Note that, the form this call for
   presentations might take possibly depends on the plans WG Chairs have
   for a particular session, as well as on the policies they set for
   accepting presentation slot requests.

   o  Collecting the presentations slots requests.

   As a preliminary step to building the agenda, the WG Secretary could
   collect all the requests for presentations slots. In order to be able
   to do so, the WG Secretary should make sure that he or she is aware
   of all the formulated requests by 1/ clearly indicating in the call
   for presentations slots that he or she must be (one of) the
   recipients of the requests, and 2/ checking with the Chairs if they
   would have received requests that he or she was not in copy of.

   o  Proposing a WG session agenda.

   Depending on the known preferences of the WG Chairs for the typical
   structure of their WG sessions, on the objectives WG Chairs have for
   a particular WG session, and/or on his personal view, the Secretary
   could propose a structured agenda for the upcoming WG session(s).
   Following that, the WG Secretary could work with the Chairs to
   finalize the agenda in view of publishing a first draft agenda.

   o  Submitting the WG session agenda.

   At the deadline, or earlier to the extent possible, the WG Secretary
   could publish the draft and then final agenda for the WG session(s).
   The WG Secretary could then inform the WG that the agenda has been
   published. Also, depending on an agreement given by the WG Chairs,
   the Secretary could inform the participants having requested a
   presentation slot of the reason why they were not retained in the WG
   session's agenda.

   o  Requesting presentations materials.

   Combined to the notification of the publication of the WG session's
   agenda, or separately, the WG Secretary could ask the presenters to
   send the material in support of their upcoming presentation. This
   request should come with a deadline to give sufficient time to upload
   the materials before the WG session(s).

   o  Preparing the WG Status material.



WG Secretaries           Expires May 5, 2014                   [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      WG Secretaries Good Practices         November 2013


   WG sessions typically start with a slot allocated to the WG Chairs
   during which is presented a status of the WG. The WG Secretary could
   produce part, or the totality, of the WG status slides by compiling
   the appropriate information. As part of this step, the WG Secretary
   could query the authors of WG documents to know the status of and
   plans for their document (e.g., envisaged date of readiness for WG
   Last Call). This, mostly if not only, applies to WG documents the
   state of which is not evident. For example there is no apparent need
   to poll authors of a WG document which is in IESG processing.

   o  Uploading the materials.

   The WG secretary could, sufficiently ahead of time, upload the
   presentations materials. This is useful both to the WG participants
   wanting to have access to the material and to the person responsible
   for displaying the material during the session.

2.2. A Working Group Session

   The role of the WG Secretary could also cover the phase of a WG
   session.

   o  Check list.

   For the WG Chairs to enjoy their lunch, coffee or cookie until the
   last minute, the WG Secretary could sacrifice his or her time and
   enter the meeting room well in advance to prepare the session. This
   might include for example checking if blue sheets are available, but
   also preparing the session's material to be displayed, launching
   collaborative software environments (e.g., WebEx), preparing minute
   taking, and so on. The usefulness of such preparation depends of
   course on the WG and on the session. A WG session with a light agenda
   might not require all this. On the other hand, a WG with an extremely
   packed agenda and for which every minute counts, might benefit from
   such preparation.

   o  Running the WG session.

   The WG Secretary could be responsible for displaying the material and
   running through the slides as speakers advance through their
   presentation.

   The WG Secretary would typically also act as the minute taker. It is
   recommended that, in the event a WG Secretary is unable to attend a
   WG session or take minutes, a suitable replacement be identified
   before the WG session.



WG Secretaries           Expires May 5, 2014                   [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      WG Secretaries Good Practices         November 2013


   In addition, the WG Secretary might also identify a Jabber scribe to
   aid remote participants to follow discussions and proxy questions
   from remote participants.

   Performing multiple tasks during WG sessions might pose certain
   challenges but nothing insurmountable.

   o  After the WG session.

   After the end of a session the WG Secretary could bring the blue
   sheets to the Secretariat, and socialize with the very supportive and
   welcoming people composing the Secretariat.

2.3. Conclusion of an IETF Meeting

   o  Publishing the WG session's minutes.

   While it is highly recommended that the minutes of WG session(s) be
   published as quickly as possible, this might only be feasible after
   the end of the week of an IETF meeting. In any case, if the WG
   Secretary was the minute taker he or she could polish the notes taken
   (correcting typos, or even complementing missing parts with audio
   recordings) and send these to the Chairs for validation.

   Once the WG Chairs agree on the written minutes, the Secretary could
   publish these using the means available.

   Once published, the WG Secretary could communicate the link to the
   WG, asking at the same time the WG participants to review and inform
   him or her of changes that would need to be performed before final
   publication.

3. Inter-Meeting Phase

   Tracking is the word dominating the tasks a WG Secretary could be
   expected to perform between two IETF meetings.

   o  Recording and tracking authors' inputs.











WG Secretaries           Expires May 5, 2014                   [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      WG Secretaries Good Practices         November 2013


   At least on two occasions, the WG Secretary is in position to receive
   inputs from authors of Internet-Drafts concerning the status and
   plans they have for their document(s). This is during the preparation
   phase (when building the WG status material) and during the WG
   session when authors sometime express such plans at the end of their
   presentation. The WG Secretary should record and track this
   information as it is valuable for sketching a plan and a schedule of
   the actions the WG Chairs will possibly have to take (e.g., poll for
   adoption, WG Last Call, ...).

   o  Recording and tracking WG Chairs' decisions.

   Decisions are sometimes taken by WG Chairs during WG sessions. These
   decisions often imply some follow-up actions that the WG Chairs need
   to take. The WG Secretary could record and track the action-points
   for the WG Chairs.

   o  Tracking events.

   In between the IETF meetings, a number of WG events including WG
   adoption polls, WG Last Calls, and acknowledging and managing
   Liaisons and Communications from/to external Standards organizations,
   will occur. The WG Secretary could track these events and report
   progress, or deadlines to the Chairs. For the WG adoption polls and
   WG Last Calls, the WG Secretary could remind the Chairs of the end of
   the poll/call together with an evaluation of the positions expressed
   on the WG mailing list in response to these polls/calls.

   o  Monitoring IPR Polls.

   As per [2] it is important for document authors and contributors to
   disclosed IPR in a timely fashion. Typically an IPR poll might be
   conducted prior to a WG adoption poll or WG Last Call. The WG
   Secretary could monitor and track responses to IPR polls, and chase
   authors and contributors where necessary. Where IPR poll responses
   are not forthcoming, the WG Secretary could notify the Chairs.

   o  Maintaining the Datatracker and ensuring it is up to date.

   An important tool in support of WG operations is the Datatracker. The
   WG Secretary could have the responsibility of keeping the Datatracker
   up to date so that it reflects the exact state each document is
   effectively in. This could also include marking milestones as done or
   updating the target date of a milestone.





WG Secretaries           Expires May 5, 2014                   [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      WG Secretaries Good Practices         November 2013


   The WG Secretary could also make sure that the replacement status of
   documents is correct, and request for the application of the proper
   status in case it is incorrect or not indicated and necessary.

   o  Doing "Chair-like" work.

   Depending on the established working relationship between the WG
   Chairs and Secretary, the latter could take actions such as close
   polls for adoption or WG Last Calls, be the Shepherd as per [3] for a
   given document.

   o  Attending WG Chairs' training.

   WG Secretaries are invited to the IETF WG chairs' lunch tutorials.

4. Security Considerations

   Delegation based on trust is not expected to introduce security
   issues.

5. IANA Considerations

   This document does not require any action from the IANA.

6. Conclusions

   The role of a WG Secretary can range from a few of these possible
   tasks to the full spectrum of them, and even beyond. This depends of
   his or her willingness, free time, technical knowledge, and on the
   expectations and requirements from the WG Chairs.

   The closer the WG Secretary and Chairs work, the more efficient it
   will be. As such, it is desired that the WG Chairs and Secretary
   share a common set of information. Finally, clear communication and
   the setting of expectations by both parties will ensure a successful
   and mutually beneficial relationship, and will directly facilitate to
   the success of the WG.

7. References

7.1. Informative References

   [1]   Bradner, S., "IETF Working Group Guidelines and Procedures",
         BCP 25, RFC 2418, September 1998.

   [2]   Bradner, S., "Intellectual Property Rights in IETF Technology",
         BCP 79, RFC 3979, March 2005.


WG Secretaries           Expires May 5, 2014                   [Page 8]

Internet-Draft      WG Secretaries Good Practices         November 2013


   [3]   Levkowetz, H., Meyer, D., Eggert, L., and Mankin, A., "Document
         Shepherding from Working Group Last Call to Publication", RFC
         4858, May 2007.

8. Acknowledgments

   This document was prepared using 2-Word-v2.0.template.dot.










































WG Secretaries           Expires May 5, 2014                   [Page 9]

Internet-Draft      WG Secretaries Good Practices         November 2013


Authors' Addresses

   Martin Vigoureux
   Alcatel-Lucent

   Email: martin.vigoureux@alcatel-lucent.com


   Daniel King
   Old Dog Consulting

   Email: daniel@olddog.co.uk





































WG Secretaries           Expires May 5, 2014                  [Page 10]

