


Network Working Group                           O. Gonzalez de Dios, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                Telefonica
Intended status: Standards Track                              G. Bernini
Expires: September 8, 2011                                     Nextworks
                                                               G. Zervas
                                                           Univ of Essex
                                                               M. Basham
                                                         Intune Networks
                                                           March 7, 2011


   Framework for GMPLS and path computation support of sub-wavelength
                       switching optical networks
            draft-gonzalezdedios-subwavelength-framework-00

Abstract

   This document discusses the framework for enhancements to the GMPLS
   architecture to control sub-wavelength switching optical networks.
   Sub-wavelengths refer to the time-shared utilization of a single
   wavelength by optical bursts, packets or slots.

   Sub-wavelngth technologies are the base of new cost-effective network
   architectures.  In particular, they are sutited for metro areas, to
   cope with high traffic volumens as well as more demanding
   requirements of networked applications.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 8, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.



Gonzalez de Dios, et al.  Expires September 8, 2011             [Page 1]

Internet-Draft  Frwk for GMPLS in Sub-wavelength networks     March 2011


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Sub-wavelength optical networks  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     2.1.  Sub-wavelength switching research and applicability
           scenarios  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Sub-wavelength network resource control  . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1.  Control functions and time-scales  . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  Network resource modeling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  GMPLS implications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     4.1.  Impact on GMPLS signaling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
       4.1.1.  Sub-wavelength resources and labels  . . . . . . . . .  9
       4.1.2.  Sub-wavelength traffic specification . . . . . . . . . 10
     4.2.  Impact on GMPLS routing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       4.2.1.  Sub-wavelength network resource availability
               advertisement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   5.  Route computation and sub-wavelength resource assignment
       scenarios  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.1.  Centralized PCE and centralized sub-wavelength
           resource assignment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     5.2.  Centralized PCE and distributed sub-wavelength
           resource assignment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     5.3.  Distributed PCE and distributed sub-wavelength
           resource assignment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   6.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   7.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   8.  Contributing Authors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   9.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     10.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
     10.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18








Gonzalez de Dios, et al.  Expires September 8, 2011             [Page 2]

Internet-Draft  Frwk for GMPLS in Sub-wavelength networks     March 2011


1.  Introduction

   A broad range of emerging services and applications drive the
   evolutionary trend of traffic growth at metro-regional networks with
   more and more demands for high bandwidth.  However, recent measures
   and forecasts by network operators show that the expected traffic
   flows in the metro area for the next 10 years will occupy just a
   fraction of a wavelength (typically bearing 10 Gbps throughputs);
   consequently, the deployment of sub-wavelength statistically
   multiplexed networks can highly enhance the resource utilization
   [MAINS].  Moreover, the emergence of network centric services is also
   requiring more and more short-lived connections (in the range of
   secs, mins) with Quality of Service (QoS) guarantees: such services
   include Video on Demand (VoD), Storage Area Network (SAN) and a
   number of Cloud services.

   In this network scenario, the metro-regional network should provide a
   contention-free sub-wavelength data transport environment with fast
   time-to-service delivery (few msecs), low end-to-end delay and
   multiple levels of guaranteed QoS.

   Nevertheless, an effective and sub-wavelength enabled supervising
   upper control layer might be needed to control the end-to-end
   resource reservation and routing across multiple sub-wavelength
   technologies.  The IETF GMPLS is currently the most efficient
   solution for managing the physical core tunneling technologies of
   Internet and Telecom service providers.  The natively generalized
   control approach enabled by GMPLS on the underlying Transport Plane
   allows also handling multiple switching technologies under a single
   Control Plane instance (MRN/MLN).  The objective of this document is
   to define the framework for enhancements and extensions to the GMPLS
   protocols and procedures, to allow the automatic control of sub-
   wavelength optical switches.


2.  Sub-wavelength optical networks

   During the last few years there have been considerable developments
   on sub-wavelength optical networks for metro/core regions.  Sub-
   wavelength optical networks incorporate the optical time domain in
   addition to the wavelength/frequency and space domains that are dealt
   with the wavelength switched optical networks (WSON).  Such networks
   allow for time-shared use of individual or multiple wavelengths of a
   transparent optical network infrastructure, and multiple label
   switched paths (LSPs) can be transparently switched over the same
   wavelength of any link.  This is possible due to the dynamic access
   and switch of transparent sub-wavelength data-sets such as optical
   time-slices/packet/bursts/flows.



Gonzalez de Dios, et al.  Expires September 8, 2011             [Page 3]

Internet-Draft  Frwk for GMPLS in Sub-wavelength networks     March 2011


   The use of sub-wavelength networks is further motivated by the need
   to support the various granularity requirements (as in SONET/SDH,
   OTN) on optically transparent switching technologies either fixed or
   arbitrary.  This allows for optical bypassing of statistically
   multiplexed sub-wavelength data-sets and as such reduces the use of
   O/E/O conversions and data processing at every node.  This can
   potentially enhance optical network utilization and reduce the
   transport delays.  Such network system has the ability to create,
   transport and switch tailored data-sets at sub-wavelength
   granularities to match network service requirements.

   The main enablers of sub-wavelength optical networks are the fast
   tunable lasers [FTL] and fast optical switching elements [Fast-
   Switches].  Fast tunable lasers that span across the ITU-T C-Band can
   deliver nanoseconds wavelength-tuning time.  Fast tunable lasers have
   been used in ingress and bypass nodes.  In the ingress node they
   enable time-shared tunable transmission [Tunable-Trans], whereas in
   bypass nodes time-shared optical switching [Tunable-Switch] and time-
   shared wavelength conversion [Lambda-Convert].  More specifically,
   tunable ingress nodes can map optical data-sets (e.g. slots/packets/
   bursts/flows) to particular wavelength(s) according to their
   destination address.  Bypass nodes use fast tunable lasers together
   with other optical devices (e.g. semiconductor optical amplifiers,
   SOAs) to convert incoming wavelength(s) for contention purposes.
   Combination of fast and transparent optical switches, MUX/DEMUX,
   optical wavelength routers (e.g.  NxN arrayed waveguide gratings,
   AWGs), fast EDFAs (fast transient response time) and bursty receivers
   have been used to demonstrate sub-wavelength transparent optical
   networks [OPS-Network1][OPS-Network2].

   In addition, Optical Packet Switch and Transport is a new networking
   platform that collapses layers 0 to 2 inside a ring network, by using
   ultra-fast tunable laser transmitters.  The tunable transmitters act
   as both transmitters and switches simultaneously, which collapses the
   layers under one control system.  The ring supports wavelength
   routing scheme to address packet flows based on wavelength selective
   switch, which acts as the address.[OPST-Network3].

   Such optical technologies have enabled a variety of optical switching
   techniques.  These include optical slotted and un-slotted optical
   packet/label/burst [OPS-OLS-OBS], as well as optical flow switching
   [OFS].  Such switching techniques have been designed to support both
   connection-oriented and connection-less services and as such
   different quality of service (QoS) guarantees.  Furthermore, effort
   has been made to deliver interoperation between optical burst and
   circuit switched networks [CP-OBS-OCS] as well as a common control
   plane solution for optical packet and circuit switched networks
   [CP-OPS-OCS].



Gonzalez de Dios, et al.  Expires September 8, 2011             [Page 4]

Internet-Draft  Frwk for GMPLS in Sub-wavelength networks     March 2011


   Considering the evolution, progress and variety of sub-wavelength
   optical networks it is important to address standardization aspects
   that would specify a transport-agnostic GMPLS control plane able to
   control and provision different sub-wavelength optical transport
   networks on a generic way.  This would deliver interoperability
   between different sub-wavelength transport networks but also between
   sub-wavelength and WSON networks.

2.1.  Sub-wavelength switching research and applicability scenarios

   Some positioning statements by networks operators are provided in
   this section to describe their main objectives, activities and
   interests towards the deployment of sub-wavelength switching
   technologies.

   The main drivers for sub-wavelength switching technologies are:

   o  Increased capacity and scalability for intensive bandwidth
      consuming applications (e.g. 3D video, high definition
      videoconference, etc)

   o  Operational simplicity by integrating optical (DWDM) and packet
      switching technologies (e.g.  Ethernet, MPLS) in a single
      networking platform

   o  Dynamic high capacity data transfers between distributed servers
      would enable an optimized planning of both IT (e.g. storage and
      computation) and network resources for cloud services

   Both network operators and vendors will be benefitiated form the
   definition of common GMPLS extensions for any kind of sub-wavelength
   technology enabling end-to-end resource reservation and routing
   across different technological domains (e.g. sub-wavelength, WSON,
   etc).


3.  Sub-wavelength network resource control

3.1.  Control functions and time-scales

   The time-scale of sub-wavelength optical networks control is broad
   and can be structured in three different levels.  The first and
   coarser time-scale represents the duration of an LSP, which could be
   long-lived (e.g. days, hours) or short-lived (e.g. minutes, minutes,
   hours, days and can be directly controlled by GMPLS.  The LSP
   durations decreasing towards seconds may have an impact on both GMPLS
   signaling and routing procedures, in terms of provisioning success,
   signaling overheads and TE topology accuracy.



Gonzalez de Dios, et al.  Expires September 8, 2011             [Page 5]

Internet-Draft  Frwk for GMPLS in Sub-wavelength networks     March 2011


   The second level of time-scale is the optical frame in a repeating
   cycle.  The duration (i.e. microseconds, milliseconds) and frame
   structure is controlled by sub-wavelength optical transport plane and
   is used to accommodate any fixed (i.e. optical time-slots) or
   flexible (i.e. optical packets/bursts, time-slices) data-sets.  LSP
   durations in this context correspond to multiple frames.  Framing the
   time on a cycle manner can aid towards the provisioning of the sub-
   wavelength data-sets.

   The finest level of time-scale is the time-slice.  It represents a
   fixed or flexible time proportion of a frame that corresponds to the
   amount of data-set (e.g. time-slot/time-slice, packet, burst, flow)
   and in turn bandwidth that can be individually switched and
   transported over the sub-wavelength optical network.  The allocation
   and assignment of time-slices is controlled by the sub-wavelength
   optical transport plane.  In this context, an LSP could be associated
   with a number of fixed or arbitrary sized time-slices per frame and
   the allocation of these time-sliced resources is described in section
   6.

   Consequently, the control of sub-wavelength network resources can be
   effectively performed just through the tight interworking of two
   different control layers: the GMPLS and the specific sub-wavelength
   optical transport control functions.  This vertical cooperation can
   follow two different models, i.e. the overlay-style and the
   augmented, which depends on the procedures for information exchange
   and resource provisioning, and the information contents.

   The overlay-style interworking is based on an independent control by
   GMPLS and sub-wavelength optical transport network.  Main concepts of
   this architectural model are the following:

   o  The TED maintained by the GMPLS (either distributed or
      centralized).

   o  The sub-wavelength optical transport control functions, which
      manage the sub-wavelength scheduling database.

   o  Using this model only the concept of sub-wavelength data over WSON
      is feasible.  In that case a LSP is first established and then
      sub-wavelength flows use it to transport data across the network.
      Only a single LSP can be established per wavelength (no
      statistical multiplexing is feasible) and as such resource
      utilization and service flexibility is limited to grooming at the
      ingress node.

   The advantage of such solution is the minimum extensions required for
   the GMPLS protocols.  However, the major disadvantage of such



Gonzalez de Dios, et al.  Expires September 8, 2011             [Page 6]

Internet-Draft  Frwk for GMPLS in Sub-wavelength networks     March 2011


   interworking approach is the lack of statistical multiplexing
   capabilities (i.e. multiple sub-wavelength LSPs per wavelength).

   The augmented model allows for TE information exchange from sub-
   wavelength optical transport control system and GMPLS CP.  Main
   concepts are:

   o  Deployment of two types of TED:

      *  the GMPLS TED holds and maintains aggregated/abstracted sub-
         wavelength information (e.g. total time-slices - number or
         duration - per wavelength)

      *  the sub-wavelength optical transport TED maintains detailed
         information (e.g. accurate time availability representation of
         each frame per wavelength).

   o  Route selection and time resource assignment is coordinated among
      both GMPLS and sub-wavelength transport control functions in a
      centralized or distributed style:

      *  the GMPLS is able to assign the possible route(s) and/or
         wavelength(s) based on the abstracted resource information to
         follow standard procedures.

      *  in a subsequent step, based on the calculated routes and/or
         wavelengths, the sub-wavelength transport control can assign
         the time-slices with the frame structure.

   o  The LSP is provisioned by GMPLS and the individual access and
      switching of each time-slice is guaranteed by sub-wavelength
      optical transport control functions (e.g. data mapping to optical
      time-slices at ingress nodes, time-slice switching at bypass
      nodes).

   o  Due to this collaborative task more than one LSP per wavelength is
      feasible and, thus, sub-wavelength statistical multiplexing is
      feasible.  Also guaranteed contention-free network services can be
      delivered due to pre-established LSPs.

3.2.  Network resource modeling

   The vertical cooperation among the GMPLS control plane and the sub-
   wavelength transport plane control functions can be achieved under
   the condition of a certain level of GMPLS awareness of the sub-
   wavelength network resource availabilities.  Therefore, a proper
   modeling of these new switching resources is needed in terms of
   Traffic Engineering parameters.



Gonzalez de Dios, et al.  Expires September 8, 2011             [Page 7]

Internet-Draft  Frwk for GMPLS in Sub-wavelength networks     March 2011


   As previously stated, the operational time-scale of sub-wavelength
   optical networks is highly dynamic in comparison with the standard
   GMPLS operation time (i.e. signaling and routing procedures).  This
   results in an impact of the potential fast variations of sub-
   wavelength resource availabilities at GMPLS control plane.  For a
   proper GMPLS operation and control traffic balance, the frequency of
   subwavelength resource updates needs to be limited, though minimizing
   the potential contention on resource (i.e. wavelengths) due to
   subsequent inaccurate TE topology representation.  Specific
   aggregation procedures need to be performed by the sub-wavelength
   optical network transport plane control functions to let the GMPLS
   maintain a summarized knowledge of sub-wavelength network resource
   availabilities, coherent and compatible with its operation time-
   scale.  For a given sub-wavelength optical network link, the GMPLS
   control plane should be aware of the free capacity in each
   wavelength, to allow the time-shared use of the single wavelengths.

   Such an aggregated and summarized description of sub-wavelength
   network resources would enable, on the one hand, the exchange of sub-
   wavelength TE routing information, and, on the other hand, the
   signaling and configuration of multiple LSPs sharing - where possible
   - the same wavelengths.  The resource contention avoidance as well as
   the sub-wavelength switching configuration would be left to the sub-
   wavelength optical network transport plane control functions.  This
   further control action will occur along the end-to-end path
   provisioned by the GMPLS control plane.

   Since the sub-wavelength enabled GMPLS control plane is responsible
   for the end-to-end resource reservation and routing across multiple
   sub-wavelength technologies, the network resource modeling should be
   valid for any kind of sub-wavelength technology (i.e. optical
   packets, bursts, flows, etc.).  To this purpose, a new Switching Type
   should be defined to model the sub-wavelength network resources:

   o  Sub-Wavelength Switching Capability: to indicate the switching
      performed on a link, which supports the time-shared use of a
      wavelength.  The SWSC would group all the specific implementations
      of sub-wavelength switching.

   Since the Sub-Wavelength Switching Capability would be an
   intermediate switching type between TDM (value: 100) and LSC (value:
   150), its value should be chosen in the <100,150> range to preserve
   the switching capability ordering and LSP region definitions
   specified in [RFC4206].

   The identification of the specific sub-wavelength technologies should
   be performed defining new LSP Encoding Types (i.e. one for each
   switching technology), to univocally identify the links able to carry



Gonzalez de Dios, et al.  Expires September 8, 2011             [Page 8]

Internet-Draft  Frwk for GMPLS in Sub-wavelength networks     March 2011


   and switch a signal encoded in a sub-wavelength format rather than
   another.

   As a result, a given sub-wavelength optical network link should be
   described at least by the following parameters:

   o  List of allowed/available wavelengths, e.g. described through the
      "Wavelength Label" format specified in [LAMBDA-LABELS]

   o  For each wavelength, a sub-wavelength TE parameter accounting the
      free wavelength capacity


4.  GMPLS implications

   The GMPLS architecture [RFC3945] is designed to provide automatic
   provisioning of connections with traffic engineering, traffic
   survivability (i.e. protections, restorations), and automatic
   resource discovery and management.  The GMPLS specifications are
   fully agnostic of specific deployment models and transport
   environments.  Specific procedures have been defined to control
   transport networks as diverse as SDH/SONET [RFC3946], OTNs
   incorporating G.709 encapsulation [RFC4328], and Ethernet[RFC5828].

   The sub-wavelength optical networks expose switching granularities
   and capabilities not natively supported by GMPLS.  The following sub-
   sections provides a description of the impact of sub-wavelength
   switching granularity support on the GMPLS signaling and routing
   control functions, identifying a set of requirements to be evaluated
   for extensions of the current GMPLS protocol suite.

4.1.  Impact on GMPLS signaling

   Current GMPLS signaling procedures does not support the provisioning
   of sub-wavelength optical LSPs, where a single wavelength in a link
   can be shared among multiple LSPs.  Two GMPLS signaling aspects are
   mainly affected by the introduction of sub-wavelength switching
   granularity: the identification of the sub-wavelength labels, and the
   characterization of the sub-wavelength data traffic.

4.1.1.  Sub-wavelength resources and labels

   An LSP signaled in a sub-wavelength optical network will reserve hop-
   by-hop the sub-wavelength resources.  Current GMPLS signaling
   procedures does not support the identification of such fine-grained
   transport network resources.  This means that a new type of label,
   i.e. a sub-wavelength label, should be defined to identify the sub-
   wavelength resources to be reserved in the transport plane for a



Gonzalez de Dios, et al.  Expires September 8, 2011             [Page 9]

Internet-Draft  Frwk for GMPLS in Sub-wavelength networks     March 2011


   given LSP.

   Different formats and encodings of the sub-wavelength label should be
   supported, depending on the specific sub-wavelength technologies
   controlled by the GMPLS.

   Depending on how the sub-wavelength network resources are assigned
   along the LSP route, the sub-wavelength label would be processed in
   different ways.

   When the sub-wavelength network resources assignment adopts the
   centralized model, a sub-wavelength label should be provided for each
   hop in the ERO of the LSP to be signaled.  Therefore, the resources
   to be reserved along the LSP route would be selected and assigned
   before the signaling of the LSP, and the reservation would be
   performed hop-by-hop in the ERO processing during the LSP setup
   phase.

   On the other hand, when the sub-wavelength network resources
   assignment adopts the distributed model (see section 5.2 and 5.3),
   the selection of the resources would not be performed before the LSP
   signaling and the ERO would not contain any sub-wavelength label.
   One or more sub-wavelength labels might be signaled in the Suggested
   Label object [RFC3473] to provide, if needed, the downstream node
   with the upstream node's label preference.

4.1.2.  Sub-wavelength traffic specification

   GMPLS signaling allows the inclusion of technology-specific
   parameters during the LSP setup, as described in [RFC3471][RFC3471].
   In particular, when an LSP has to be established in a sub-wavelength
   optical network domain, a dedicated traffic profiling should be
   defined to describe the traffic characteristics of the sub-wavelength
   data flow, and identify network specific performance parameters (e.g.
   based on the sub-wavelength control parameters, such as burst
   durations, blockings, delays, etc.)

   In GMPLS RSVP-TE [RFC3473], the SENDER_TSPEC object is used to
   describe the traffic parameters for the LSP being established, and
   allows for the inclusion of technology specific parameters.
   Therefore, a specific traffic profiling should be used in the sub-
   wavelength optical networks context, for two main purposes:

   o  Identification of the requested LSP switching granularity, to
      distinguish among the different sub-wavelength technologies

   o  Identification of the sub-wavelength traffic requirements and
      characteristics for the LSP to be signaled in the sub-wavelength



Gonzalez de Dios, et al.  Expires September 8, 2011            [Page 10]

Internet-Draft  Frwk for GMPLS in Sub-wavelength networks     March 2011


      optical network domain

   In particular, due to the short-lived fast-paced nature of the sub-
   wavelength data flows, the sub-wavelength traffic characteristics for
   the LSP to be established should be described, at least, in terms of
   bandwidth and QoS (i.e. delay, jitter, etc.) requirements, such as:

   o  Bandwidth information: to specify the bandwidth requested for the
      reservation of the LSP, e.g. indicating average and peak
      bandwidths associated to the sub-wavelength data flow traffic to
      reserve.

   o  Delay information: to specify the end-to-end delay requirements
      for a burst of traffic to be transmitted across the sub-wavelength
      optical network from source to destination (e.g. in terms of
      average and maximum delays).

   o  Jitter information: to specify the maximum acceptable variation of
      latency for the bursts of traffic transmitted in the sub-
      wavelength optical network.

4.2.  Impact on GMPLS routing

   When an LSP has to be installed in a sub-wavelength optical network,
   the path computation process should find a suitable route for the
   requested connection.  The selection of the end-to-end route (i.e.
   hops and links) should be performed at the GMPLS layer, while the
   sub-wavelength network resources assignment should be carried out by
   the sub-wavelength transport plane control functions.  This means
   that the GMPLS routing protocol should be extended to advertise some
   aggregated sub-wavelength information to represent the actual
   availabilities in the transport plane, and allow the selection of the
   optimal end-to-end route.

4.2.1.  Sub-wavelength network resource availability advertisement

   GMPLS routing [RFC4202][RFC4203] defines the Interface Switching
   Capability Descriptor to advertise switching capabilities and
   encoding formats supported by a given link.  According to what stated
   in section 4.2, in a sub-wavelength optical network scenario the
   Interface Switching Capability Descriptor should support:

   o  The new Sub-Wavelength Switching Capability defined to describe
      the time-shared use of a wavelength

   o  The new LSP Encoding Types defined to identify the different sub-
      wavelength encoding formats




Gonzalez de Dios, et al.  Expires September 8, 2011            [Page 11]

Internet-Draft  Frwk for GMPLS in Sub-wavelength networks     March 2011


   Moreover, per [RFC4203], the Interface Switching Capability
   Descriptor advertises also aggregated link information at the
   bandwidth level (i.e.  Maximum LSP Bandwidth).  It specifies the
   maximum bandwidth that a single LSP can reserve on that interface.

   However, rather than operating at the bandwidth level, the sub-
   wavelength enabled GMPLS should operate at least on a wavelength
   basis, and preferably on a sub-wavelength basis.  Indeed, the
   distribution of wavelength and sub-wavelength availabilities is the
   key element to enable both GMPLS and path computation support of sub-
   wavelength switching optical networks.

   GMPLS routing extensions in support of Wavelength Switching Optical
   Networks (WSON) are currently under study, and the usage of the
   Available Labels sub-TLV to advertise the available wavelengths in a
   given link has been proposed in [WSON-Routing].  On the other hand,
   dedicated GMPLS routing extensions must be defined to advertise, for
   each wavelength, the TE parameters accounting the free wavelength
   capacity, according to the network resource modeling detailed in
   section 4.2.  The distribution of the sub-wavelength availabilities
   should be used in addition to the Available Labels sub-TLV to further
   detail the time-shared usage of the single wavelengths, introducing a
   finer granularity.


5.  Route computation and sub-wavelength resource assignment scenarios

   Based on the interworking models between GMPLS and the sub-wavelength
   switching control layer, three approaches for route computation can
   exist:

   o  Centralized in both control planes

   o  Centralized in GMPLS and distributed in the sub-wavelength
      switching control layer

   o  Distributed in both control planes

   A key functional element in all the scenarios is the Path Computation
   Element (PCE), which may be centralized or distributed , and perform
   the computation of a set of potential routes between the source and
   destination sub-wavelength capable nodes, matching the specified
   service and end-to-end traffic parameters.  For this purpose, the PCE
   should store a summarized view of the sub-wavelength network
   topology, detailed in terms of nodes, TE links, the related
   wavelengths and aggregated slots availabilities.  This TE information
   may be dynamically updated in different ways, e.g. through IGP
   routing protocols, like OSPF-TE, properly extended.



Gonzalez de Dios, et al.  Expires September 8, 2011            [Page 12]

Internet-Draft  Frwk for GMPLS in Sub-wavelength networks     March 2011


   The PCE may interact with a sub-wavelength resource assignment
   entity, which operates in the sub-wavelength control layer and stores
   a detailed view of the slot/time-period utilization on all the links
   of the sub-wavelength network, and provides the logical
   representation of synchronized frames per link.  The SLAE assigns the
   requested bandwidth on one of the potential routes, and may
   additionally guarantee both slot/time-period continuity constraint
   and wavelength-continuity constraint where needed.

   Specific aspects of the different architectural scenarios regarding
   the association of PCE and sub-wavelength resource assignment are
   described below.

5.1.  Centralized PCE and centralized sub-wavelength resource assignment

   This case consists of GMPLS TED with complete network view of
   aggregated sub-wavelength information for route selection and
   complete view of sub-wavelength availability (e.g. time-slice(s) per
   wavelength per link).  The process of both is concurrent, performed
   at the same location, and considers the assignment of route and sub-
   wavelength resource assignment for every link of an end-to-end LSP.
   The sub-wavelength assignment occurs before the actual LSP
   provisioning.

5.2.  Centralized PCE and distributed sub-wavelength resource assignment

   This case differs from the first one on the aspect of distributed
   sub-wavelength assignment based on initial route calculations.  As
   such, after the calculation of K possible paths (e.g. shortest paths)
   the sub-wavelength assignment is attempted on a hop-by-hop basis at
   sub-wavelength optical transport level.  The sub-wavelength TED
   information on each node might consist of either only neighbor's link
   information or complete network information.

5.3.  Distributed PCE and distributed sub-wavelength resource assignment

   In that case both route and sub-wavelength assignment happens in a
   distributed manner.  As such each node calculates the possible next
   hops at GMPLS level and the sub-wavelength assignment uses such info
   to assign the available time-slices.  Again the aggregate TED might
   consist of complete network resource availability information and
   sub-wavelength TED might consist of either neighbor or complete
   network information.  In case of complete sub-wavelength TED
   information at each node the success ratio on provisioning LSPs might
   increase at the expense of increased routing information exchange at
   sub-wavelength transport control system.





Gonzalez de Dios, et al.  Expires September 8, 2011            [Page 13]

Internet-Draft  Frwk for GMPLS in Sub-wavelength networks     March 2011


6.  Security Considerations

   This document does not introduce new security issues; the
   considerations in [RFC3471], [RFC3473] and [RFC3945] apply.

   GMPLS control of sub-wavelength switching assumes that users and
   devices attached to UNIs may behave maliciously, negligently, or
   incorrectly.  Intra-provider control traffic is trusted to not be
   malicious.  In general, these requirements are no different from the
   security requirements for operating any GMPLS network.  Access to the
   trusted network will only occur through the protocols defined for the
   UNI or NNI or through protected management interfaces.

   When in-band GMPLS signaling is used for the control plane the
   security of the control plane and the data plane may affect each
   other.  When out-of-band GMPLS signaling is used for the control
   plane the data plane security is decoupled from the control plane and
   therefore the security of the data plane has less impact on overall
   security.

   For a more comprehensive discussion on GMPLS security please refer to
   [RFC5920].


7.  IANA Considerations

   This document introduces the following requests for IANA action:

   o  Assign a new Switching Type: "Sub-Wavelength" (suggested value
      TBD) in the GMPLS Signaling Parameters / Switching Types registry.

   o  Assign new LSP Encoding Types for the different sub-wavelength
      switching technologies":

   o  New error codes in the RSVP Parameters / Error Codes and Globally-
      Defined Error Value Sub-Codes registry:


8.  Contributing Authors

   Juan Pedro Fernandez-Palacios Gimenez
   Telefonica Investigacion y Desarrollo
   C/Ramon de la Cruz
   Madrid, 28006
   Spain

   Phone: +34 91 3379037
   Email: jpfpg@tid.es



Gonzalez de Dios, et al.  Expires September 8, 2011            [Page 14]

Internet-Draft  Frwk for GMPLS in Sub-wavelength networks     March 2011


   Gino Carrozzo
   Nextworks
   via Turati 43/45
   Pisa
   Italy

   Phone:
   Email: g.carrozzo@nextworks.it

   Dimitra Simeonidou
   University of Essex
   Wivenhoe Park
   Colchester, Essex
   U.K.

   Phone:
   Email: dsimeo@essex.ac.uk


9.  Acknowledgements

   This work has been partially supported by the EC through the IST
   STREP project MAINS (INFSO-ICT-247706).


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC3471]  Berger, L., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching
              (GMPLS) Signaling Functional Description", RFC 3471,
              January 2003.

   [RFC3473]  Berger, L., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching
              (GMPLS) Signaling Resource ReserVation Protocol-Traffic
              Engineering (RSVP-TE) Extensions", RFC 3473, January 2003.

   [RFC3945]  Mannie, E., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching
              (GMPLS) Architecture", RFC 3945, October 2004.

   [RFC3946]  Mannie, E. and D. Papadimitriou, "Generalized Multi-
              Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS) Extensions for
              Synchronous Optical Network (SONET) and Synchronous
              Digital Hierarchy (SDH) Control", RFC 3946, October 2004.

   [RFC4202]  Kompella, K. and Y. Rekhter, "Routing Extensions in
              Support of Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching
              (GMPLS)", RFC 4202, October 2005.



Gonzalez de Dios, et al.  Expires September 8, 2011            [Page 15]

Internet-Draft  Frwk for GMPLS in Sub-wavelength networks     March 2011


   [RFC4203]  Kompella, K. and Y. Rekhter, "OSPF Extensions in Support
              of Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching (GMPLS)",
              RFC 4203, October 2005.

   [RFC4206]  Kompella, K. and Y. Rekhter, "Label Switched Paths (LSP)
              Hierarchy with Generalized Multi-Protocol Label Switching
              (GMPLS) Traffic Engineering (TE)", RFC 4206, October 2005.

   [RFC4328]  Papadimitriou, D., "Generalized Multi-Protocol Label
              Switching (GMPLS) Signaling Extensions for G.709 Optical
              Transport Networks Control", RFC 4328, January 2006.

   [RFC5828]  Fedyk, D., Berger, L., and L. Andersson, "Generalized
              Multiprotocol Label Switching (GMPLS) Ethernet Label
              Switching Architecture and Framework", RFC 5828,
              March 2010.

   [RFC5920]  Fang, L., "Security Framework for MPLS and GMPLS
              Networks", RFC 5920, July 2010.

10.2.  Informative References

   [CP-OBS-OCS]
              Hong, X., "Testbed of OBS/GMPLS interworking, WOBS 2009",
              2009.

   [CP-OPS-OCS]
              Miyazawa, T., "Experimental Performance Evaluation of
              Control Mechanisms for Integrated Optical Packet- and
              Circuit-Switched Networks, IEEE GLOBECOM, FutNet05.1,
              pp.360-360, Miami, USA", 2010.

   [FTL]      Simsarian, J., "Fast tunable lasers for optical routers
              and networks, CLEO/QELS 2006", 2006.

   [Fast-Switches]
              Zervas, E., "Multi-Granular Optical Cross-Connect: Design,
              Analysis and Demonstration IEEE Journal of Optical
              Communications and Networking, Vol. 1, Issue 1, pp.
              69-84", 2009.

   [Lambda-Convert]
              Lal, V., "Monolithic Wavelength Converters for High-Speed
              Packet-Switched Optical Networks JSTQE, 13, PP. 49-57",
              2007.

   [OFS]      Weichenberg, G. and V. Chan, "Design and Analysis of
              Optically Flow Switched Networks, IEEE/OSA Journal on



Gonzalez de Dios, et al.  Expires September 8, 2011            [Page 16]

Internet-Draft  Frwk for GMPLS in Sub-wavelength networks     March 2011


              Optical Communications and Networking", Aug 2009.

   [OPS-Network1]
              Chiaroni, D., "Demonstration of the Interconnection of Two
              Optical Packet Rings with a Hybrid Optoelectronic Packet
              Router, PD3.5, ECOC", 2010.

   [OPS-Network2]
              Furukawa, H., "First Development of Integrated Optical
              Packet and Circuit Switching Node for New-Generation
              Networks, We.8.A.4, ECOC", 2010.

   [OPS-Network3]
              Fernandez-Palacios, J., "IP Offlloading over Multi-
              granular Photonic Switching Technologies, Mo.2.D.6, ECOC",
              2010.

   [OPS-OLS-OBS]
              Yoo, S., "Optical packet and burst switching technologies
              for the future photonic Internet, J. Lightwave Technol.,
              vol., no. 12, pp. 4468 4492", Dec 2006.

   [Tunable-Switch]
              Klonidis, D., "Fast and Widely Tunable Optical Packet
              Switching Scheme based on Tunable Laser and Dual-Pump
              Four-Wave Mixing, IEEE PTL, vol. 16, no. 5", May 2004.

   [Tunable-Trans]
              Dunne, J., "Optical Packet Switch and Transport: A New
              Metro Platform to Reduce Costs and Power by 50% to 75%
              While Simultaneously Increasing Deterministic Performance,
              WOBS 2009", 2009.

   [WSON-Routing]
              Zhang, F., Bernstein, G., and Y. Xu, "OSPF Extensions in
              Support of Routing and Wavelength Assignment (RWA) in
              Wavelength Switched Optical Networks (WSONs),
              draft-zhang-ccamp-rwa-wson-routing-ospf-03.txt, March
              2010.", 2010.

   [lambda-label]
              Otani, T. and D. Li, "Generalized Labels for Lambda-
              Switching Capable Label Switching Routers, work in
              progress:
              draft-ietf-ccamp-gmpls-g-694-lambda-labels-11.txt", 2011.






Gonzalez de Dios, et al.  Expires September 8, 2011            [Page 17]

Internet-Draft  Frwk for GMPLS in Sub-wavelength networks     March 2011


Authors' Addresses

   Oscar Gonzalez de Dios (editor)
   Telefonica
   Ramon de la Cruz, 82-84
   Madrid,   28006
   Spain

   Phone: +34 913374013
   Email: ogondio@tid.es


   Giacomo Bernini
   Nextworks
   via Turati 43/45
   Pisa
   Italy

   Phone:
   Email: g.bernini@nextworks.it


   Georgios Zervas
   Univ of Essex
   Wivenhoe Park
   Colchester, Essex
   U.K.

   Phone:
   Email: gzerva@essex.ac.uk


   Mark Basham
   Intune Networks
   via Turati 43/45
   Colchester
   U.K.

   Phone:
   Email: mark.basham@intunenetworks.com











Gonzalez de Dios, et al.  Expires September 8, 2011            [Page 18]


