


Network Working Group                                        A. Melnikov
Internet-Draft                                               K. Zeilenga
Intended status: Standards Track                           Isode Limited
Expires: March 5, 2012                                 September 2, 2011


                   Security Labels in Internet Email
                    draft-zeilenga-email-seclabel-04

Abstract

   This document describes a header field, SIO-Label, for use in
   Internet Mail to convey the sensitivity of the message.  The SIO-
   Label header field which may carry a textual representation (a
   display marking) and/or a structural representation (a security
   label) of the sensitivity of the message.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 5, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.



Melnikov & Zeilenga       Expires March 5, 2012                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               email-seclabel               September 2011


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Relationship to Inline Sensitivity Markings  . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  Relationship to preexisting Security Label Header Fields . . .  4
   4.  Relationship to Enhanced Security Services for S/MIME  . . . .  5
   5.  Conventions Used in This Document  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   6.  Overview . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   7.  The SIO-Label header field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     10.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     10.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Appendix A.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11




































Melnikov & Zeilenga       Expires March 5, 2012                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               email-seclabel               September 2011


1.  Introduction

   A security label, sometimes referred to as a confidentiality label,
   is a structured representation of the sensitivity of a piece of
   information.  A security label can be used in conjunction with a
   clearance, a structured representation of what information
   sensitivities a person (or other entity) is authorized to access, and
   a security policy to control access to each piece of information.
   For instance, an email message could have a EXAMPLE CONFIDENTIAL
   label, and hence requiring the sender and the receiver to have a
   clearance granting access to EXAMPLE CONFIDENTIAL labeled
   information.  X.841 [X.841] provides a discussion of security labels,
   clearances, and security policy.

   A display marking is a textual representation of the sensitivity of a
   piece of information.  For instance, "EXAMPLE CONFIDENTIAL" is a
   textual representation of the sensitivity.  A security policy can be
   used to generate display markings from security labels.  Display
   markings are generally expected to be prominently displayed whenever
   the content is displayed.

   Sensitivity-based authorization is used in networks which operate
   under a set of information classification rules, such as in
   government military agency networks.  The standardized formats for
   security labels, clearances, and security policy are generalized and
   do have application in non-government networks.

   Security labels may also be used for purposes other than
   authorization.  In particular, they may be used simply to convey the
   sensitivity of a piece information.  The security label could be
   used, for instance, to organize content in a content store.

   This document describes a protocol for conveying the sensitivity of a
   electronic mail message [RFC5322], as a whole.  In particular, this
   document describes a header field SIO-Label to carry a security
   label, a display marking, and display colors.

   This protocol is based in part upon Security Labels in XMPP [XEP258]
   protocol.

2.  Relationship to Inline Sensitivity Markings

   In environments requiring messages to be marked with an indication of
   their sensitivity, it is common to place a textual representation of
   the sensitivity, a display marking, within the body to the message
   and/or in the Subject header field.  For instance, the authors often
   receives messages of the form:




Melnikov & Zeilenga       Expires March 5, 2012                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               email-seclabel               September 2011


   To: author <author@example.com>;
   From: Some One <someone@example.net>;
   Subject: the subject (UNCLASSIFIED)

   Marking: UNCLASSIFIED

   Text of the message.

   Marking: UNCLASSIFIED

   Typically, when placed in the body of the message, the marking is
   inserted into the content such that it appears as the first line(s)
   of text of the body of the message.  This is known as a FLOT.  The
   marking may or may not be surrounded by other text indicating the
   marking denotes the sensitivity of the message.  A FLOT may also
   accompanied by a LLOT (last line(s) of text) marking.  The message
   above contains a two-line FLOT and a two-line LLOT (in both cases, a
   line providing a Protective Marking and a empty line between the
   marking and the original content).

   Typically, when placed in the Subject of the message, the marking is
   inserted before or after the original subject field contents
   surrounded with by parentheses or the like, and separated from the
   content by white space.

   The particulars syntax and semantics of inline sensitivity markings
   is generally a local matter.  This hinders interoperability within an
   organization wanting to take actions based upon these markings, and
   hinders interoperability between cooperating organizations wanting to
   usefully share sensitivity information

   The authors expect such markings to be continued to widely used,
   especially in absence of ubiquitous support for a standardized header
   field indicating the sensitivity of the message.

   The authors hope that through the use of standardized header field,
   interoperability within organizations and between organizations can
   be improved.

3.  Relationship to preexisting Security Label Header Fields

   A number of non-standard header fields, such as the X-X411 field, are
   used to carry a representation of the sensitivity of the message,
   whether a structured representation or textual representation.

   The authors hope the use of non-standard header fields will be
   replaced, over time, with use of the header field described in this
   document.



Melnikov & Zeilenga       Expires March 5, 2012                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               email-seclabel               September 2011


4.  Relationship to Enhanced Security Services for S/MIME

   Enhanced Security Services for S/MIME (ESS) [RFC2634] provides,
   amongst other services, signature services "for content integrity,
   non-repudiation with the proof of origin, and [securely] binding
   attributes (such as a security label) to the original content."

   While it may be possible to utilize the protocol described in this
   document concurrently with ESS, this protocol should generally be
   viewed as an alternative to ESS.

   It is noted that in ESS, the security label applies to MIME [RFC2045]
   content, where in this protocol the label applies to the message as a
   whole.

   It is also noted that in ESS, security labels are securely bound to
   the MIME content through the use of digital signatures.  This
   protocol does not provide message signing services, and hence does
   not provide securely binding the label to the message, or for content
   integrity, or for non-repudiation of the proof of origin.

   This protocol is designed for situations/environments where message
   signing is not necessary to provide sufficient security.

5.  Conventions Used in This Document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].

   The formal syntax specifications in this document use the Augmented
   Backus-Naur Form (ABNF) as described in [RFC5234].  Terms not defined
   here are taken from [RFC2231].

6.  Overview

   A Mail User Agent (MUAs) originating a message can, if so configured,
   offer the user with a menu of sensitivities to choose from and, upon
   selection, insert the display marking, foreground and background
   colors, and security label parameters associated with that selection
   into the SIO-Label header field of the message.

   Mail Submission Agents (MSAs), Mail Transfer Agents (MTAs), and Mail
   Delivery Agents (MDAs) then can, if so configured, use the provided
   (or lack thereof) sensitivity information in determining whether to
   accept, forward, or otherwise act on the message as submitted.  These
   agents, here after referred to as Service Agents (SAs), can, if so
   configured, modify the sensitivity information of the message, such



Melnikov & Zeilenga       Expires March 5, 2012                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               email-seclabel               September 2011


   as replacing the security label and/or display marking with an
   equivalent representations of the sensitivity of the message.

   Receiving MUAs which implement this extension SHALL, when displaying
   the message, also prominently display the marking, if any, conveyed
   in the header field or, if policy aware and configured to display
   locally generated markings, a marking generated by the conveyed label
   and the governing policy.  It is also desirable to display this
   marking in listings of messages.  In the case the conveyed marking is
   displayed, marking SHOULD be displayed using the foreground and
   background colors conveyed in the header field.  In the case the
   marking was generated from conveyed label and the governing policy,
   the marking SHOULD be displayed using the foreground and background
   colors conveyed by the governing policy.

   While MUAs are not expected to make authorization decisions based
   upon values of the SIO-Label header field, MUAs can otherwise use the
   provided (or lack thereof) sensitivity information in determining how
   to act on the message.  For instance, the MUA may organize messages
   in its store of messages based upon the content of this header field.

7.  The SIO-Label header field

   The header field name is "SIO-Label" and its content is a set of key/
   value pairs, each referred to as a parameter.

   Formal header field syntax:

   sio-label = "SIO-Label:" [FWS] sio-label-parm-seq CRLF

   sio-label-parm-seq = sio-label-parm
       [ [FWS] ";" [FWS] sio-label-parm-seq ]

   sio-label-parm = parameter ; as defined in RFC 2231

   The "marking" parameter is a display string for use by
   implementations which are unable or unwilling to utilize the
   governing security policy to generate display markings.  The
   "marking" parameter SHOULD generally be provided in SIO-Label header
   fields.  It ought only be absent where an SA relies on other SA to
   generate the marking.

   The "fgcolor" and "bgcolor" parameters are tokens restricted to color
   production representing the foreground and background colors,
   respectively, for use in colorizing the display marking string.
   Their values are RGB colors in hexadecimal format (e.g., "#ff0000"),
   or one of the CSS color names (e.g., "red") given in named-color type
   below (the 16 HTML4 colors + "orange") [CSS3-Color].  The default



Melnikov & Zeilenga       Expires March 5, 2012                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               email-seclabel               September 2011


   foreground color is black.  The default background is white.  The
   "fgcolor" and "bgcolor" parameters SHALL be absent if the marking
   parameter is absent.

   Formal color syntax:

   color = hex-color / named-color

   hex-color = "#" 6HEXDIG    ; Hex encoded RGB

   named-color =
              "aqua" /
              "black" /
              "blue" /
              "fuschia" /
              "gray" /
              "green" /
              "lime" /
              "maroon" /
              "navy" /
              "olive" /
              "purple" /
              "red" /
              "silver" /
              "teal" /
              "white" /
              "yellow" /
              "orange" ; named colors

   The "type" parameter is a quoted-string containing the string ":ess"
   or the string ":x411" or a URI [RFC3986] denoting the type and
   encoding of "label" parameter.  The "label" parameter value is a
   quoted string.  The "type" parameter SHALL be present if the "label"
   parameter is present.  The "label" parameter SHALL be present if the
   "type" parameter is present.  The absence of the "type" and "label"
   parameters indicates the message is handled, where sensitivity-based
   authorization is performed, under default handling rules (e.g., as if
   no SIO-Label was present).

   The string ":ess" indicates the "label" parameter value is the base64
   [RFC4648] encoding of the BER [X.690] encoding of an ESS security
   label [RFC2634].

   ESS Label Example:

   SIO-Label: marking="EXAMPLE CONFIDENTIAL";
       fgcolor=black; bgcolor=red;
       type=":ess"; label="MQYGASkCAQM="



Melnikov & Zeilenga       Expires March 5, 2012                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               email-seclabel               September 2011


   The string ":x411" indicates the "label" parameter value is the
   base64 [RFC4648] encoding of the BER [X.690] encoding of an X.411
   security label [X.411].

   X.411 Label Example:

   SIO-Label: marking="EXAMPLE CONFIDENTIAL";
       fgcolor=black; bgcolor=red;
       type=":x411"; label="MQYGASkCAQM="

   The header field SHALL minimally contain a "marking" parameter or
   contain both the "type" and "label" parameters.

   This header field may be extended to include additional parameters by
   future document formally updating (or replacing) this document.
   Implementations SHOULD ignore additional parameters they do not
   recognize.

   Implementors should note that the referenced RFC 2231 productions
   rely on [RFC0822] ABNF which implicitly allows white space in certain
   cases.  In particular, whitespace is implicitly allowed in the
   parameter production immediately before and after the "=".  It is
   noted that RFC 2231 allows for quoted-string values (of the parameter
   production) of substantial length and for string characters outside
   of US-ASCII, or other such cases.

   Extended Example:

   SIO-Label: marking*=us-ascii'en'EXAMPLE%20CONFIDENTIAL;
       fgcolor = black ; bgcolor = red ;
       type=":ess"; label*0="MQYG";
       label*1="ASkCAQM="

   The Extended Example is equivalent to the ESS Label Example above.

8.  IANA Considerations

   IANA is requested to add, as detailed below, the SIO-Label header
   field to the "Permanent Message Header Field Registry", defined by
   Registration Procedures for Message Header Fields [RFC3864].

   Header field name: SIO-Label
   Applicable protocol: mail [RFC5322]
   Status: standard
   Author/change controller: IETF (iesg@ietf.org)
   Specification document(s): [[anchor9: this document]]





Melnikov & Zeilenga       Expires March 5, 2012                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               email-seclabel               September 2011


9.  Security Considerations

   Sensitive information should be appropriately protected (whether
   labeled or not).  For email messages, it is generally appropriate for
   the sending entity to authenticate the receiving entity and to
   establish transport level security, including both data integrity and
   data confidential protective services.  Where a receiving entity to
   make authorization decisions based upon assertions of the sending
   entity, including assertions of identity, it is generally appropriate
   for the receiving entity to authenticate the sending entity.

   This document provides a facility for expressing the sensitivity of
   an email message.  The mere expression of actual sensitivity of a
   generally does not elevate the sensitivity of the message, however
   expressions of sensitivities can themselves be sensitivity
   information.  For instance, a marking of "BLACK PROJECT RESTRICTED"
   could disclose the existence of a sensitivity project.

   The SIO-Label header field expresses the sensitivity of the whole
   message, including the header and body.  This document does not
   provide a means to express the sensitivity of portions of an email
   message, such as the possibly different sensitivities of various MIME
   parts that the message may be composed of.  This approach used in
   this favors simplicity and ease of use of a single expression of
   sensitivity over the complexity and difficultly of use of portion
   marking and labeling.

   The expressed sensitivity can be used in determining how to handle a
   message.  For instance, the value of the SIO-Label header field can
   be used to determine if it appropriate to be forwarded to a
   particular entity and, if so, what the minimum security services are
   that ought to be used in the forwarding exchange.

   The actual content may be more or less sensitivity than indicated by
   the security label.  Agents should avoid lowering security
   requirements for message exchange with a particular entity based upon
   conveyed sensitivity.

   This protocol does not itself provide message signing services, such
   a used in providing message integrity protection, non-repudiation,
   and binding of attributes, such the security label, to the message.
   While it possible that this protocol could be used with a general
   message signing service, this document does not detail such use.

   While security label and display marking parameters are expected to
   express the same sensitivity, nothing in this specification ensures
   that the security label and display marking values express the same
   sensitivity.  For instance, an MUA could submit a message which



Melnikov & Zeilenga       Expires March 5, 2012                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               email-seclabel               September 2011


   contains security label which expresses one sensitivity and a display
   marking a different sensitivity, and by doing so, possibly cause an
   SA to inappropriately handle the message.  It is generally
   appropriate for each SA making use of the SIO-Label values to
   determine if the security label and display marking values express
   the same sensitivity and, if not, take appropriate action (such as
   rejecting the message).

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]     Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
                 Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2634]     Hoffman, P., "Enhanced Security Services for S/MIME",
                 RFC 2634, June 1999.

   [RFC2231]     Freed, N. and K. Moore, "MIME Parameter Value and
                 Encoded Word Extensions:
                 Character Sets, Languages, and Continuations",
                 RFC 2231, November 1997.

   [RFC3864]     Klyne, G., Nottingham, M., and J. Mogul, "Registration
                 Procedures for Message Header Fields", BCP 90,
                 RFC 3864, September 2004.

   [RFC3986]     Berners-Lee, T., Fielding, R., and L. Masinter,
                 "Uniform Resource Identifier (URI): Generic Syntax",
                 STD 66, RFC 3986, January 2005.

   [RFC4648]     Josefsson, S., "The Base16, Base32, and Base64 Data
                 Encodings", RFC 4648, October 2006.

   [RFC5322]     Resnick, P., Ed., "Internet Message Format", RFC 5322,
                 October 2008.

   [RFC5234]     Crocker, D. and P. Overell, "Augmented BNF for Syntax
                 Specifications: ABNF", STD 68, RFC 5234, January 2008.

   [X.411]       International Telephone and Telegraph Consultative
                 Committee, "Message Handling Systems (MHS) - Message
                 Transfer System: Abstract Service Definition and
                 Procedures", CCITT Recommendation X.411, June 1999.

   [X.690]       International Telephone and Telegraph Consultative
                 Committee, "ASN.1 encoding rules: Specification of
                 basic encoding Rules (BER), Canonical encoding rules



Melnikov & Zeilenga       Expires March 5, 2012                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               email-seclabel               September 2011


                 (CER) and Distinguished encoding rules (DER)",
                 CCITT Recommendation X.690, July 2002.

   [CSS3-Color]  Celik, T. and C. Lilley, "CSS3 Color Module", World
                 Wide Web Consortium CR CR-css3-color-20030514,
                 May 2003,
                 <http://www.w3.org/TR/2003/CR-css3-color-20030514>.

10.2.  Informative References

   [RFC0822]     Crocker, D., "Standard for the format of ARPA Internet
                 text messages", STD 11, RFC 822, August 1982.

   [RFC2045]     Freed, N. and N. Borenstein, "Multipurpose Internet
                 Mail Extensions (MIME) Part One: Format of Internet
                 Message Bodies", RFC 2045, November 1996.

   [X.841]       International Telephone and Telegraph Consultative
                 Committee, "Security information objects for access
                 control", CCITT Recommendation X.841, October 2000.

   [XEP258]      Zeilenga, K., "XEP-0258: Security Labels in XMPP",
                 XEP XMPP Extension Protocols, August 2011.

Appendix A.  Acknowledgements

   The authors appreciate the review, comment, and text provided by
   community members, including Dave Cridland, Brad Hards, Steve Kille,
   Alan Ross, Jim Schaad, and David Wilson.

Authors' Addresses

   Alexey Melnikov
   Isode Limited
   5 Castle Business Village
   36 Station Road
   Hampton, Middlesex  TW12 2BX
   UK

   EMail: Alexey.Melnikov@isode.com


   Kurt Zeilenga
   Isode Limited

   EMail: Kurt.Zeilenga@isode.com





Melnikov & Zeilenga       Expires March 5, 2012                [Page 11]

