
A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3062

        Title:      LDAP Password Modify Extended Operation
        Author(s):  K. Zeilenga
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       February 2001
        Mailbox:    Kurt@OpenLDAP.org
        Pages:      6
        Characters: 11807
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:  None

        I-D Tag:    draft-zeilenga-ldap-passwd-exop-05.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3062.txt


The integration of the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP)
and external authentication services has introduced non-DN
authentication identities and allowed for non-directory storage of
passwords.  As such, mechanisms which update the directory
(e.g., Modify) cannot be used to change a user's password.  This
document describes an LDAP extended operation to allow modification of
user passwords which is not dependent upon the form of the
authentication identity nor the password storage mechanism used.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

