





INTERNET-DRAFT                                   Kurt D. Zeilenga
Intended Category: Standard Track                Isode Limited
Expires in six months                            2 September 2010



                     The LDAP Don't Use Copy Control
                 <draft-zeilenga-ldap-dontusecopy-08.txt>


Status of this Memo

  This document is intended to be, after appropriate review and
  revision, submitted to the IESG for consideration as a Standard Track
  document.  Distribution of this memo is unlimited.  Technical
  discussion of this document will take place on the IETF LDAP
  Extensions mailing list <ldapext@ietf.org>.  Please send editorial
  comments directly to the author <Kurt.Zeilenga@Isode.COM>.

  This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
  provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

  Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering Task
  Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups. Note that other
  groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

  Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
  and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
  time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference material
  or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

  The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
  http://www.ietf.org/1id-abstracts.html.

  The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
  http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.


  Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
  document authors.  All rights reserved.











Zeilenga               LDAP Don't Use Copy Control              [Page 1]

INTERNET-DRAFT     draft-zeilenga-ldap-dontusecopy-08   2 September 2010


Abstract

  This document defines the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP)
  Don't Use Copy control extension which allows a client to specify that
  copied information should not be used in providing service.  This
  control is based upon the X.511 dontUseCopy service control option.


1.  Background and Intended Usage

  This document defines the Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP)
  [RFC4510] Don't Use Copy control extension.  The control may be
  attached to request messages to indicate that copied (replicated or
  cached) information [X.500] should not be used in providing service.
  This control is based upon the X.511 [X.511] dontUseCopy service
  control option.

  The Don't Use Copy control is intended to be used where the client
  requires the service be provided using original (master) information
  [X.500].

  For instance, a client might desire to have an authorative answer to a
  question of whether or not a particular user is a member of a group.
  To ask this question of a server, the client might issue a compare
  request [RFC4511], with the Don't Use Copy control, where the entry
  parameter is the DN of the group, the ava.attributeDesc is 'member',
  and the ava.assertionValue is the DN of the user the client desires to
  know is or isn't a member of the group.  If the server has access to
  the original (master) information (directly or through chaining), it
  performs the operation against the original (master) information and
  return compareTrue or compareFalse (or an error).  If the server does
  not have access to the orignal information, the server is obligated to
  either return a referral or an error.  It is noted that the referral
  is not necessarily to the server holding the original (master)
  information.  It is also noted that an authorative answer to the
  question might not be available to the client for any number of
  reasons.


2. Terminology

  DSA stands for Directory System Agent (or server).
  DSE stands for DSA-specific Entry.

  The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
  "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
  document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].




Zeilenga               LDAP Don't Use Copy Control              [Page 2]

INTERNET-DRAFT     draft-zeilenga-ldap-dontusecopy-08   2 September 2010


3.  The Don't Use Copy Control

  The Don't Use Copy control is an LDAP Control [RFC4511] whose
  controlType is IANA-ASSIGNED-OID and controlValue is absent.  The
  criticality MUST be TRUE.  There is no corresponding response control.

  The control is appropriate for both LDAP interrogation operations,
  including Compare and Search operations [RFC4511].  It is
  inappropriate for all other operations, including Abandon, Bind,
  Delete, Modify, ModifyDN, StartTLS, and Unbind operations [RFC4511].

  When the control is attached to an LDAP request, the requested
  operation MUST NOT be performed on copied information.  That is, the
  requested operation MUST be performed on original information.

  If original (master) information for the target or base object of the
  operation is not available (either locally or through chaining), the
  server MUST either return a referral directing the client to a server
  believed to be better able to service the request or return an
  appropriate result code (e.g., unwillingToPerform).

  Servers implementing this technical specification SHOULD publish the
  object identifier IANA-ASSIGNED-OID as a value of the
  'supportedControl' attribute [RFC4512] in their root DSE.  A server
  MAY choose to advertise this extension only when the client is
  authorized to use it.


4.  Security Considerations

  This control is intended to be provided where providing service using
  copied information might lead to unexpected application behavior.
  Designers of directory applications should consider where it is
  appropriate for clients to provide this control.  Designers should
  consider whether use of copied information, in particular security and
  policy information, may result insecure behavior.

  Security considerations for the base operations [RFC4511] extended by
  this control, as well as general LDAP security considerations
  [RFC4510], generally apply to implementation and use of this
  extension.


5.  IANA Considerations

5.1.  Object Identifier

  It is requested that IANA assign upon Standards Action an LDAP Object



Zeilenga               LDAP Don't Use Copy Control              [Page 3]

INTERNET-DRAFT     draft-zeilenga-ldap-dontusecopy-08   2 September 2010


  Identifier [RFC4520] to identify the LDAP Don't Use Copy Control
  defined in this document.

      Subject: Request for LDAP Object Identifier Registration
      Person & email address to contact for further information:
          Kurt Zeilenga <Kurt.Zeilenga@Isode.COM>
      Specification: RFC XXXX
      Author/Change Controller: IESG
      Comments:
          Identifies the LDAP Don't Use Copy Control

5.2  LDAP Protocol Mechanism

  Registration of this protocol mechanism [RFC4520] is requested.

      Subject: Request for LDAP Protocol Mechanism Registration
      Object Identifier: IANA-ASSIGNED-OID
      Description: Don't Use Copy Control
      Person & email address to contact for further information:
          Kurt Zeilenga <Kurt.Zeilenga@Isode.COM>
      Usage: Control
      Specification: RFC XXXX
      Author/Change Controller: IESG
      Comments: none



6.  Author's Address

  Kurt D. Zeilenga
  Isode Limited

  Email: Kurt.Zeilenga@Isode.COM


7. References

  [[Note to the RFC Editor: please replace the citation tags used in
  referencing Internet-Drafts with tags of the form RFCnnnn where
  possible.]]


7.1. Normative References

  [RFC2119]     Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
                Requirement Levels", BCP 14 (also RFC 2119), March 1997.

  [RFC4510]     Zeilenga, K. (editor), "LDAP: Technical Specification



Zeilenga               LDAP Don't Use Copy Control              [Page 4]

INTERNET-DRAFT     draft-zeilenga-ldap-dontusecopy-08   2 September 2010


                Road Map", RFC 4510, June 2006.

  [RFC4511]     Sermersheim, J. (editor), "LDAP: The Protocol", RFC
                4511, June 2006.

  [RFC4512]     Zeilenga, K. (editor), "LDAP: Directory Information
                Models", RFC 4512, June 2006.


7.2. Informative References

  [X.500]       International Telecommunication Union -
                Telecommunication Standardization Sector, "The Directory
                -- Overview of concepts, models and services,"
                X.500(1993) (also ISO/IEC 9594-1:1994).

  [X.511]       International Telecommunication Union -
                Telecommunication Standardization Sector, "The
                Directory: Abstract Service Definition", X.511(1993)
                (also ISO/IEC 9594-3:1993).

  [RFC4511]     Sermersheim, J. (editor), "LDAP: The Protocol", RFC
                4511, June 2006.

  [RFC4520]     Zeilenga, K., "Internet Assigned Numbers Authority
                (IANA) Considerations for the Lightweight Directory
                Access Protocol (LDAP)", RFC 4520, BCP 64, June 2006.





Full Copyright

  Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
  document authors.  All rights reserved.

  This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
  Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
  (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
  publication of this document. Please review these documents carefully,
  as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect to this
  document.  Code Components extracted from this document must include
  Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of the Trust
  Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as described in the
  Simplified BSD License.

  This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF



Zeilenga               LDAP Don't Use Copy Control              [Page 5]

INTERNET-DRAFT     draft-zeilenga-ldap-dontusecopy-08   2 September 2010


  Contributions published or made publicly available before November 10,
  2008. The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this material
  may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow modifications
  of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.  Without
  obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling the
  copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified outside
  the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may not be
  created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format it for
  publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other than
  English.









































Zeilenga               LDAP Don't Use Copy Control              [Page 6]

