


Network Working Group                                    D. Saucez (Ed.)
Internet-Draft                                                     INRIA
Intended status: Informational                          October 15, 2012
Expires: April 18, 2013


                         LISP deployment impact
                    draft-saucez-lisp-impact-00.txt

Abstract

   The Locator/Identifier Separation Protocol (LISP) relies on three
   simple principles to scale the Internet: address role separation,
   encapsulation, and mapping.  In this document, based on
   implementation, deployment, and theoretical studies, we discuss the
   impact that a LISP deployment would have on the Internet and for the
   users.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 18, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as



Saucez (Ed.)             Expires April 18, 2013                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 LISP impact                  October 2012


   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  LISP in a nutshell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   3.  LISP for scaling the Internet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   4.  Beyond scaling the Internet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.1.  Traffic engineering  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     4.2.  IPv4/IPv6 Transition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     4.3.  Inter-domain multicast . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   5.  Impact of LISP on operations and business model  . . . . . . .  7
     5.1.  Impact on non-LISP traffic and sites . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     5.2.  Impact on LISP traffic and sites . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   8.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   Author's Address . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12





























Saucez (Ed.)             Expires April 18, 2013                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 LISP impact                  October 2012


1.  Introduction

   The Locator/Identifier Separation Protocol (LISP) relies on three
   simple principles to scale the Internet: address role separation,
   encapsulation, and mapping.  The main target of LISP is to make the
   Internet more scalable by reducing the number of routes in the DFZ as
   well as the churn.  As LISP relies on mapping and encapsulation, it
   offers more than just scalability.  For example, LISP provides a mean
   for a LISP site to precisely control is inter-domain outgoing and
   incoming traffic, with the possibility to apply different policies to
   the different domains exchanging traffic with it.  LISP can also be
   used during the IPv/IPv6 transition phase as it allows to transport
   IPv4 over IPv6 or IPv6 over IPv4.  LISP also provides a solution to
   perform inter-domain multicast.

   In this document we discuss the impact a LISP deployment would have
   on the Internet and for the users.  We first show that interworking
   results in path stretch and there is still open questions related to
   the deployment model of such interworking (not technical but
   economical).  Afterward, we show that encapsulation causes issue (but
   not in practice) because it reduces the MTU.  An important impact of
   LISP on operation is related to resiliency and troubleshooting.
   Indeed, as LISP relies on mappings that are cached and on
   encapsulation, troubleshooting is harder than in the traditional
   Internet.  Also, end-to-end encapsulation also stress resiliency as
   it makes failure detection and recovery slower than with hop-by-hop
   routing.


2.  LISP in a nutshell

   The Locator/Identifier Separation Protocol (LISP) relies on three
   simple principles: address role separation, encapsulation, and
   mapping.

   Addresses are separated in two roles: the Routing Locators (RLOCs)
   and the Endpoint Identifiers (EIDs).  RLOCs are assigned from the
   address space of the Internet service providers.  The EIDs are
   attributed by block extracted from the EID Space.  To limit the
   scalability problem of today's Internet, only the routes towards the
   RLOCs are announced on the Internet while EIDs are also propagated
   today.

   LISP routers are used at the boundary between the EID and the RLOC
   spaces.  Routers used to exit the EID space are called Ingress Tunnel
   Router (ITRs) and those used to enter the EID space the Egress Tunnel
   Routers (ETRs).  When a host sends a packet to a remote destination,
   it sends it as in today's Internet.  The packet eventually arrives at



Saucez (Ed.)             Expires April 18, 2013                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 LISP impact                  October 2012


   the border of its site at an ITR.  Because EIDs are not routable on
   the Internet, the packet is encapsulated with the source address set
   to the ITR RLOC and the destination address set to the ETR RLOC.  The
   encapsulated packet is then forwarded in the Internet until it
   reaches the selected ETR.  The ETR decapsulates the packet and
   forwards it to the destination.  The acronym xTR for Ingress/Egress
   tunnel router is used for a router playing these two roles.

   The correspondence between EIDs and RLOCs is given by the mappings.
   When an ITR needs to find ETR RLOCs that serve an EID it queries the
   mapping system.  It is worth noticing that LISP is not restricted to
   the Internet Protocol for the EID addresses.  Indeed, the LISP
   Canonical Address Format (LCAF) allows encoding any kind of address
   [I-D.farinacci-lisp-lcaf].  Therefore, any address type can be used
   as EID (the address is the key for the mapping lookup) and LISP can
   then transport, for example, Ethernet frames over the Internet.

   A more throughout introduction to LISP can be found in
   [I-D.chiappa-lisp-introduction] and a discussion around the
   architecture in [I-D.chiappa-lisp-architecture].  The complete
   specifications are given in [I-D.ietf-lisp], [I-D.ietf-lisp-ms],
   [I-D.fuller-lisp-ddt], [I-D.ietf-lisp-interworking],
   [I-D.ietf-lisp-map-versioning], and [I-D.ietf-lisp-sec].


3.  LISP for scaling the Internet

   The first goal of LISP is to scale the Internet.  LISP improves the
   Internet scalability because traffic engineering and stub do not
   appear in the core anymore, so smaller and more stable tables in the
   core.  Also, at the edge, the routing tables scale with the edge, its
   own, traffic pattern and not the size of the Internet.  Scaling
   improvement is proven by several works.

   Quoitin et al. show in [QIdLB07] that the locator/identifier
   separation improves the routing scalability by reducing the FIB size
   and increases the path diversity and thus the traffic engineering
   capabilities.  In addition, Iannone and Bonaventure show in [IB07]
   that the number of mapping entries that must be supported at an ITR
   of a campus network is limited and does not represent more that 3 to
   4 Megabytes of memory.  Similarly, Juhoon et al. show that the EID-
   to-RLOC Cache size should not exceed 14 MB for an ITR responsible of
   more than 20,000 residential ADSL users at a large ISP [KIF11].
   [IB07], [KIF11] rely on BGP and traffic traces to determine the
   number of entries to keep in the cache.  In both papers, the size of
   the cache is inferred from the number of entries by considering that
   every EID is associated with two or three locators.  [S11] confirms
   these results by looking at the distribution of the number of



Saucez (Ed.)             Expires April 18, 2013                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 LISP impact                  October 2012


   locators per EID if LISP were deployed in today's Internet.  The
   assumptions in these studies are:

   o  contiguous addresses tend to be used similarly, EID prefixes
      follow the current BGP prefixes decomposition;

   o  EIDs are used only at the stub ASes, not in the transit ASes;

   o  the RLOCs of an EID are deployed at the edge between the stubs
      owning the EID and the providers and locator addresses are
      allocated in a Provider Aggregetable (PA) mode.


4.  Beyond scaling the Internet

   Even though it is its main goal, LISP is more than just a scalability
   solution, it is also a tool to provide both incoming and outgoing
   traffic engineering [S11], can be used as an IPv6 transition at the
   routing level, and inter-domain multicast [I-D.ietf-lisp-multicast],
   [I-D.coras-lisp-re].  LISP has also proven to be a good protocol for
   mobility of devices in the Internet [I-D.meyer-lisp-mn] or even
   virtual machine mobility in data centers and multi-tenant VPN,
   however, we will not discuss here these two last points as they are
   out of the scope of the charter.

4.1.  Traffic engineering

   In today's Internet, stub networks are globally routable and the
   routing system distributes the routes to reach these stubs.  On the
   contrary, the EID prefixes of a LISP site are not routable on the
   Internet and mappings are needed to determine the list of LISP
   routers to contact to send them packets.  The difference is
   significant for two reasons.  First, packets are not sent to a site
   but to a specific ingress router.  Second, a site can control the
   entry points for its traffic by controlling its mappings.

   For traffic engineering purpose, a mapping associate an EID prefix to
   a list of RLOCs.  Each RLOC is annotated with a priority and a
   weight.  When there is several RLOCs, the ITR selects the one with
   the lowest priority value and sends the encapsulated packet to this
   RLOC.  If several such RLOCs exist, then the traffic is balanced
   proportionally to the weight among the different RLOC with the lowest
   priority value.  Traffic engineering in LISP thus allows the mapping
   owner to have a fine-grained control on the primary and backup path
   its incoming and outgoing packet use.  In addition, it can share the
   load among its links.

   Traffic engineering in LISP goes one step further.  Indeed, every



Saucez (Ed.)             Expires April 18, 2013                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 LISP impact                  October 2012


   Map-Request contains the Source EID Address of the packet that caused
   a cache miss and triggered the Map-Request.  It is thus possible for
   a mapping owner to differentiate the answer (Map-Reply) it gives to
   Map-Requests based on the requester.  This functionality is not
   possible today because a domain cannot control exactly the routes
   that will be received by domains that are not in the direct
   neighborhood.

4.2.  IPv4/IPv6 Transition

   The LISP encapsulation mechanism is designed to support any
   combination of locators and identifiers address family.  It is then
   possible to bind IPv6 EIDs with IPv4 RLOCs and vice-versa.  This
   allows transporting IPv6 packets over an IPv4 network (or IPv4
   packets over an IPv6 network), thus enabling the use of LISP as an
   IPv6 transition mechanism.

   A not so uncommon example is the case of the network infrastructure
   of a datacenter being IPv4-only while dual-stack front-end load
   balancers are used.  In this scenario, LISP can be used to provide
   IPv6 access to servers even though the network and the servers only
   support IPv4.  Indeed, assuming that the datacenter's ISP offers IPv6
   connectivity, the datacenter only needs to deploy one (or more)
   xTR(s) at its border with the ISP and one (or more) xTR(s) directly
   connected to the load balancers.  The xTR(s) at the ISP's border
   tunnels IPv6 packets over IPv4 to the xTR(s) directly attached to the
   load balancer.  The load balancer's xTRs decapsulate the packets and
   forward them to the load balancers, which act as proxies, translating
   each IPv6 packet into an IPv4.  IPv4 packets are then sent to the
   appropriate servers.  Similarly, when the server response arrives at
   the load balancer, the packet is translated back into an IPv6 packet
   and forwarded to its xTR(s), which in turn will tunnel it back, over
   the IPv4-only infrastructure, to the xTR(s) connected to the ISP.
   The packet is then decapsulated and forwarded to the ISP natively in
   IPv6.

4.3.  Inter-domain multicast

   LISP naturally LISP supports multicast as a list of locators is
   associated to the prefixes, it is thus just necessary to duplicate
   the packets to multiple RLOCs instead of selecting only one
   [I-D.ietf-lisp-multicast].

   [I-D.coras-lisp-re] and [CDM+12] propose a technique to construct
   multicast distribution tree and the test of three different
   management strategies for low latency content delivery show that such
   overlay can support thousands of members and hundreds of thousands of
   clients.  Interestingly, when constructed wisely, high client churn



Saucez (Ed.)             Expires April 18, 2013                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 LISP impact                  October 2012


   has a limited impact on the performance and management overhead.


5.  Impact of LISP on operations and business model

   Important implementation efforts (Cisco NXOS, Cisco IOS, FreeBSD
   OpenLISP, Linux LISPMob, LISP-Click) have been made to assess the
   specifications and interoperability tests [Was09] have been a
   success.  Large scale deployment in the international lisp4.net
   testbed permit to learn operational matters related to LISP.

   We have to distinguish the impact on LISP sites and traffic of the
   impact on non-LISP site and traffic.

5.1.  Impact on non-LISP traffic and sites

   LISP has no impact on traffic which has neither LISP origin nor LISP
   destination.  However, LISP can have a significant impact on traffic
   between a LISP site and a non-LISP site.  Indeed, traffic between a
   non-LISP site and a LISP site are subject to the same issues than
   those observed for LISP-to-LISP traffic (cf supra) but also have
   issues specific to the transition mechanism that allow LISP site to
   exchange packets with non-LISP site ([I-D.ietf-lisp-interworking],
   [I-D.ietf-lisp-deployment]).

   Indeed, the transition requires proxies tunnel routers (PxTRs).
   PxTRs do not cause particular technical issue.  However, by
   definition proxies cause path stretch and make troubleshooting
   harder.  There are still big questions related to PxTRs that have to
   be answered:

   o  Where to deploy PxTRs?  The placement in the topology has an
      important impact on the path stretch.

   o  How many PxTRs?  The number of PxTR has a direct impact on there
      load and the impact of the failure of a PxTR on the traffic.

   o  What part of the EID space?  Will all the PxTRs be proxies for the
      whole EID space or will it be segmented between different PxTRs?

   o  Who to operate PxTRs?  The IETF does not aim at providing business
      model hints, however, an important question to answer is related
      to the entities that will deploy PxTRs, how they will earn money
      and how the traffic will be carried with respect for the security
      and privacy.

   PxTR also normally have to advertise the EID prefix they are proxy
   for in BGP.  However, if proxies are managed by different entities,



Saucez (Ed.)             Expires April 18, 2013                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                 LISP impact                  October 2012


   they will belong to different ASes.  In this case, we have to be sure
   that it will not cause MOA issues that could negatively influence
   routing.

5.2.  Impact on LISP traffic and sites

   LISP is a protocol based on the map-and-encap paradigm which has the
   positive effects that we have given in the sections above.  However,
   by construction, LISP also have side impact on operations:

   o  MTU issue: as LISP uses encapsulation, the MTU is reduced (by 36
      bytes in IPv4), this has implication on potentially all the
      traffic.  However, in practice, on the lisp4.net network, we have
      not seen major issue due to the MTU.  This is probably due to the
      fact that current end-host stacks are well designed to deal with
      the problem of MTU.

   o  Resiliency issue: the advantage of flexibility and control offered
      by the loc/ID separation comes at the cost of increasing the
      complexity of the reachability detection.  Indeed, identifiers are
      not directly routable and have to be mapped to locators.  But a
      locator may be unreachable while others are still reachable.  This
      is an important problem for any tunnel-based solution.  In the
      current Internet, packets are forwarded independently of the
      border router of the network meaning that in case of the failure
      of a border router, another one can be used.  With LISP, the
      destination RLOC specifically designate one particular ETR, hence
      if this ETR fails, the traffic is dropped even though other ETRs
      are available for the destination site.  Another resiliency issue
      is linked to the fact that mappings are learned on demand.  When
      an ITR fails, all its traffic is redirected to other ITRs that
      might not have yet the mappings for the redirected traffic.  The
      study in [SKI+12] and [SD12] show, based on measurements and
      traffic traces, that failure of ITRs and RLOC are seldom but that
      when such failure happens, an important number of packet can be
      dropped.  Unfortunately, the current techniques for LISP
      resiliency, based on monitoring or probing are not rapid enough
      (failure recovery of the order of a few seconds).  To tackle this
      issue [I-D.bonaventure-lisp-preserve] and
      [I-D.saucez-lisp-itr-graceful] propose techniques based on local
      failure detection and recovery.

   o  Middle boxes/filters: because of encapsulation, the middle boxes
      might not understand the traffic which can cause firewall to drop
      legitimate packets.  In addition, LISP allows triangular or even
      rectangular routing, so it is hard to maintain a correct state
      even if the middle box perfectly understands LISP.  Finally,
      filtering might also have problems because they might think only



Saucez (Ed.)             Expires April 18, 2013                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                 LISP impact                  October 2012


      one host is generating the traffic (the ITR), as long as it is not
      decapsulated.

   o  Troubleshooting/debugging: the major issue years of LISP
      experimentation have shown is the difficulty of troubleshooting.
      When there is a problem in the network, it is hard to pin-point
      the reason as the operator only has an inconsistent view of the
      network.  He sees what is in its cache/database, he can try to see
      what is potentially elsewhere by querying the MRs but the
      knowledge is partial.  On top of that, ICMP is too small, which
      means that when an ICMP arrives the ITR, it might not contain
      enough information to troubleshoot correctly.  Furthermore,
      deployment in the beta network has shown that LISP+ALT was not
      easy to maintain and control, hence the migration to LISP-DDT.

   o  Business: the IETF is not aiming at providing business models.
      However, even though [IL10] shown that there is economical
      incentives to migrate to LISP, some questions are on hold.  For
      example, how will the EID be allocated to allow aggregation and
      hence scalability of the mapping system?  Who will operate the
      mapping system infrastructure and for what benefit?


6.  IANA Considerations

   TBD


7.  Security Considerations

   As every protocol, LISP is subject to security issues.  A detailed
   analysis of LISP security threats is given in
   [I-D.ietf-lisp-threats].


8.  Acknowledgments

   The people that contributed to this document are: Florin Coras, Vince
   Fuller, Joel Halpern, Luigi Iannone, Terry Manderson, Fabio Maino,
   and Gregg Schudel.


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.fuller-lisp-ddt]
              Fuller, V., Lewis, D., Ermagan, V., and A. Jain, "LISP



Saucez (Ed.)             Expires April 18, 2013                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                 LISP impact                  October 2012


              Delegated Database Tree", draft-fuller-lisp-ddt-04 (work
              in progress), September 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-lisp]
              Farinacci, D., Fuller, V., Meyer, D., and D. Lewis,
              "Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP)",
              draft-ietf-lisp-23 (work in progress), May 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-lisp-alt]
              Fuller, V., Farinacci, D., Meyer, D., and D. Lewis, "LISP
              Alternative Topology (LISP+ALT)", draft-ietf-lisp-alt-10
              (work in progress), December 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-lisp-deployment]
              Jakab, L., Cabellos-Aparicio, A., Coras, F., Domingo-
              Pascual, J., and D. Lewis, "LISP Network Element
              Deployment Considerations", draft-ietf-lisp-deployment-04
              (work in progress), September 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-lisp-interworking]
              Lewis, D., Meyer, D., Farinacci, D., and V. Fuller,
              "Interworking LISP with IPv4 and IPv6",
              draft-ietf-lisp-interworking-06 (work in progress),
              March 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-lisp-map-versioning]
              Iannone, L., Saucez, D., and O. Bonaventure, "LISP Map-
              Versioning", draft-ietf-lisp-map-versioning-09 (work in
              progress), March 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-lisp-ms]
              Fuller, V. and D. Farinacci, "LISP Map Server Interface",
              draft-ietf-lisp-ms-16 (work in progress), March 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-lisp-multicast]
              Farinacci, D., Meyer, D., Zwiebel, J., and S. Venaas,
              "LISP for Multicast Environments",
              draft-ietf-lisp-multicast-14 (work in progress),
              February 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-lisp-sec]
              Maino, F., Ermagan, V., Cabellos-Aparicio, A., Saucez, D.,
              and O. Bonaventure, "LISP-Security (LISP-SEC)",
              draft-ietf-lisp-sec-04 (work in progress), October 2012.







Saucez (Ed.)             Expires April 18, 2013                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                 LISP impact                  October 2012


9.2.  Informative References

   [CDM+12]   Coras, F., Domingo-Pascual, J., Maino, F., Farinacci, D.,
              and A. Cabellos-Aparicio, "Lcast: Software-defined Inter-
              Domain Multicast",  Technical Report, Universitat
              Politecnica de Catalunya, 2012.

   [I-D.bonaventure-lisp-preserve]
              Bonaventure, O., Francois, P., and D. Saucez, "Preserving
              the reachability of LISP ETRs in case of failures",
              draft-bonaventure-lisp-preserve-00 (work in progress),
              July 2009.

   [I-D.chiappa-lisp-architecture]
              Art, Y., "An Architectural Perspective on the LISP
              Location-Identity Separation System",
              draft-chiappa-lisp-architecture-01 (work in progress),
              July 2012.

   [I-D.chiappa-lisp-introduction]
              Art, Y., "An Introduction to the LISP Location-Identity
              Separation System", draft-chiappa-lisp-introduction-01
              (work in progress), July 2012.

   [I-D.coras-lisp-re]
              Coras, F., Cabellos-Aparicio, A., Domingo-Pascual, J.,
              Maino, F., and D. Farinacci, "LISP Replication
              Engineering", draft-coras-lisp-re-00 (work in progress),
              July 2012.

   [I-D.farinacci-lisp-lcaf]
              Farinacci, D., Meyer, D., and J. Snijders, "LISP Canonical
              Address Format (LCAF)", draft-farinacci-lisp-lcaf-10 (work
              in progress), July 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-lisp-threats]
              Saucez, D., Iannone, L., and O. Bonaventure, "LISP Threats
              Analysis", draft-ietf-lisp-threats-02 (work in progress),
              September 2012.

   [I-D.meyer-lisp-mn]
              Farinacci, D., Lewis, D., Meyer, D., and C. White, "LISP
              Mobile Node", draft-meyer-lisp-mn-07 (work in progress),
              April 2012.

   [I-D.saucez-lisp-itr-graceful]
              Saucez, D., Bonaventure, O., Iannone, L., and C. Filsfils,
              "LISP ITR Graceful Restart",



Saucez (Ed.)             Expires April 18, 2013                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                 LISP impact                  October 2012


              draft-saucez-lisp-itr-graceful-00 (work in progress),
              July 2012.

   [IB07]     Iannone, L. and O. Bonaventure, "On the cost of caching
              locator/id mappings",  In Proc. ACM CoNEXT 2007.

   [IL10]     Iannone, L. and T. Leva, "Modeling the economics of Loc/ID
              Separation for the Future Internet",  Book Chapter,
              Towards the Future Internet - Emerging Trends from the
              European Research, IOS Press.

   [KIF11]    Kim, J., Iannone, L., and A. Feldmann, "Deep dive into the
              lisp cache and what isps should know about it",  In Proc.
              IFIP Networking 2011.

   [QIdLB07]  Quoitin, B., Iannone, L., de Launois, C., and O.
              Bonaventure, "Evaluating the benefits of the locator/
              identifier separation",  In Proc. ACM MobiArch 2007.

   [S11]      Saucez, D., "Mechanisms for Interdomain Traffic
              Engineering with LISP",  PhD Thesis, Universite catholique
              de Louvain, 2011.

   [SD12]     Saucez, D. and B. Donnet, "On the Dynamics of Locators in
              LISP",  In Proc. IFIP Networking 2012.

   [SKI+12]   Saucez, D., Kim, J., Iannone, L., Bonaventure, O., and C.
              Filsfils, "A Local Approach to Fast Failure Recovery of
              LISP Ingress Tunnel Routers",  In Proc. IFIP Networking
              2012.

   [Was09]    Wasserman, M., "LISP Interoperability Testing",  IETF 76,
              LISP WG presentation, 2009.


Author's Address

   Damien Saucez
   INRIA
   2004 route des Lucioles BP 93
   06902 Sophia Antipolis Cedex
   France

   Email: damien.saucez@inria.fr







Saucez (Ed.)             Expires April 18, 2013                [Page 12]

