


Network Working Group                                          D. Saucez
Internet-Draft                                    INRIA Sophia Antipolis
Intended status: Informational                          October 21, 2011
Expires: April 23, 2012


                  CCN Router Interconnection with LISP
                        draft-saucez-lisp-ccn-00

Abstract

   Content distribution prevails in today's Internet and Content-Centric
   Networking (CCN) proposes to access the data directly by their
   content instead of their location.  In this memo we present a LISP
   based solution to interconnect CCN routers over the Internet.  We
   first describe how content names can be encoded in LISP with LCAF.
   We then detail the operations of CCN routers to determine the CCN
   routers to which forward Interest and Data messages.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 23, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Saucez                   Expires April 23, 2012                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                LISP for CCN                  October 2011


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Data Name Encoding with LCAF  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Data Name to RLOC Mappings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   6.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6


























Saucez                   Expires April 23, 2012                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                LISP for CCN                  October 2011


1.  Introduction

   Content distribution prevails in today's Internet.  This shift of
   paradigm implies the adoption of new techniques to distribute data
   based on the content instead of the location.  To this aim, Content-
   Centric Networking (CCN) has been proposed [CCN].  In CCN content
   requester sends an Interest to its CCN router neighbors that
   propagate the Interest to the neighbors and so on until a router that
   owns or cache the Data of interest is reached.  The corresponding
   Data is sent by this router and walk back to the requester.
   Intermediate CCN routers can cache the Data to speed-up the content
   retrieval in case of the same content is requested later.

   CCN is fundamentally different to what we are used today with
   location based retrieval (a DNS name is resolved into the address of
   a particular server where the content corresponding to the name is
   stored).  Indeed, with CCN, the content can be anywhere (e.g., stored
   in a cache).

   CCN relies on hierarchical content naming to enable name aggregation.
   The aggregation follows the longest prefix matching lookup principle.
   Name are of the form "/User or App supplied name/Versioning/
   Segmentation".  For example,
   "/ietf.org/id/txt/draft-saucez-lisp-ccn/_00/_s1" could be used to
   represent the segment 1 of the version 00 of the I.D.
   "draft-saucez-lisp-ccn".  In CCN this human readable Data name is
   encoded in binary as follow: 78ietf.org2id3txt21draft-saucez-lisp-
   ccn3FD000020001.

   LISP [I-D.ietf-lisp] could be used to allow CCN routers to be
   remotely interconnected over the Internet.  LISP would be used to
   dynamically tunnel Interests and Data between CCN routers.  If CCN
   routers run LISP, they can associate names to CCN routers with the
   mappings.  For CCN, a LISP mapping associates Data names to RLOCs.

   Section 2 describes how to encode CCN Data names in LISP with LISP
   Canonical Addresses [I-D.farinacci-lisp-lcaf].  Section 3 shows how a
   LISP enabled CCN router can retrieve CCN Data name to RLOC mappings.
   We assume that the mapping system supports LCAF.


2.  Data Name Encoding with LCAF

   Mappings in LISP associate an EID prefix to a list of RLOCs.  In
   general, EIDs and RLOCs are IP.  However, LISP is not limited to IP
   as it relies on AFIs.  Moreover, the 16387 AFI is reserved for the
   LISP Canonical Address Format (LCAF) [I-D.farinacci-lisp-lcaf].  LCAF
   specifies a TLV based format to encode EIDs in a flexible way.



Saucez                   Expires April 23, 2012                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                LISP for CCN                  October 2011


   Data names can be encoded with LCAF opaque keys.  The Key Field Num
   field set to 0 and the Key Wildcard Fields field set to 0x0.  The Key
   Field Num determines the number of equal-length fields the opaque key
   can be broken up into.  The different parts of the Data address being
   of any arbitrary length, the Data address must be considered as a
   single field that cannot be decomposed.  The Key Wildcard Fields
   determines the key parts that must not be considered for the lookup.
   As the whole key must be taken into account, all the bits in the
   field must be set to 0.


3.  Data Name to RLOC Mappings

   In order to encapsulate the CCN messages and forward them to the
   appropriate CCN routers, the CCN router must know the CCN routers to
   which send the Interest and Data messages.  To do so, Data names are
   associated to a list of RLOCS as if they were normal EID.

   If no entry exists in the CCN router FIB for the Data name in a
   received Interest.  The CCN router triggers a miss and a Map-Request
   is sent on the CCN mapping system instance.  The requested EID being
   the Data name in the Interest that triggered the miss.  If a mapping
   exists for this Data name, the mapping will eventually be installed
   in the LISP enabled CCN router.  Upon mapping reception, one virtual
   interface per RLOC is created and associated to the Interest.
   Priority and weight can be used to prefer some RLOC and Interests can
   be simultaneously sent to all the preferred RLOC.

   CCN focuses on content, not on location.  A CCN router thus have no
   information about the CCN router that originated an Interest: the PIT
   only associates the Interest to the requesting faces and the Interest
   contains no information about the requester.  If we call D the CCN
   router that received the Interest message and I the CCN router that
   sent the Interest message.  D can use gleaning to back-walk the Data
   message to the appropriate CCN router (i.e., I).  When D receives an
   Interest message, it gleans I's EID and I's RLOC.  The RLOC is the IP
   address used for the LISP encapsulation.  The EID must be a Data
   name.  The CCN router then creates a virtual face to which it
   associates the gleaned mapping.  When a Data message is sent on this
   face (i.e., when D receives a Data message for the Interest), the
   virtual face LISP encapsulates the Data message and fixes the
   destination EID to the gleaned EID associated to the face.  The
   gleaned mapping is stored for a time equal to the timer associated to
   the Interest in the PIT.  Only LISP encapsulated messages must
   trigger the gleaning and virtual face creation.  When LISP
   encapsulated message is received, it must simply be decaspsulated and
   processed by the CCN instance.  I and D EIDs must be Data names.  To
   this aim, every LISP interface of a LISP enabled CCN router is



Saucez                   Expires April 23, 2012                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                LISP for CCN                  October 2011


   assigned a unique name.  This name has no other purpose than
   identifying the LISP interface for the Data message walk back.  We
   propose to use the form /LISP/RLOC/IPv4/192.0.2.1 (resp. /LISP/RLOC/
   IPv6/2001:DB8::1) where 192.0.2.1 (resp. 2001:DB8::1) is the RLOC
   used for the encapsulation.  This way of naming the interface allows
   dynamic, and configurationless name generation.

   As explained above, CCN relies on hierarchical content naming to
   enable name aggregation.  It thus mean that perfect matching for the
   Interest might not exist in the mapping system (e.g., a CCN node
   aggregates all the I.D. within the /ietf.org/id/txt prefix).
   However, LCAF implements an exact matching method.  Thus, if the
   mapping system has /ietf.org/id/txt but not
   /ietf.org/id/txt/draft-saucez-lisp-ccn/_00/_s1, the mapping system
   returns no mapping for the request while /ietf.org/id/txt would had
   been returned.  To overcome this limitation, the requester can send a
   Map-Request with several EIDs or several Map-Requests.  In our
   example, the requester could send requests for
   /ietf.org/id/txt/draft-saucez-lisp-ccn/_00/_s1,
   /ietf.org/id/txt/draft-saucez-lisp-ccn/_00/
   /ietf.org/id/txt/draft-saucez-lisp-ccn/ /ietf.org/id/txt/,
   /ietf.org/id and /ietf.org.  The requester then encapuslates the
   Interest message to the mapping associated with the longest prefix it
   requested.


4.  Security Considerations

   TO DO


5.  Conclusion

   Content distribution prevails in today's Internet and Content-Centric
   Networking (CCN) proposes to access the data directly by their
   content instead of their location.  In this memo we present a LISP
   based solution to interconnect CCN routers over the Internet.  We
   first describe how content names can be encoded in LISP with LCAF.
   We then detail the operations of CCN routers to determine the CCN
   routers to which forward Interest and Data messages.


6.  Informative References

   [CCN]      Van Jacobson, Diana K. Smetters, James D. Thornton,
              Michael F. Plass, Nicholas H. Briggs, and Rebecca L.
              Braynard, "Networking Named Content", CoNEXT 2009,
              December 2009.



Saucez                   Expires April 23, 2012                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                LISP for CCN                  October 2011


   [I-D.farinacci-lisp-lcaf]
              Farinacci, D., Meyer, D., and J. Snijders, "LISP Canonical
              Address Format (LCAF)", draft-farinacci-lisp-lcaf-05 (work
              in progress), April 2011.

   [I-D.ietf-lisp]
              Farinacci, D., Fuller, V., Meyer, D., and D. Lewis,
              "Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP)",
              draft-ietf-lisp-15 (work in progress), July 2011.


Author's Address

   Damien Saucez
   INRIA Sophia Antipolis
   2004, Route des Lucioles BP 93
   06902 Sophia Antipolis CEDEX,
   France

   Email: damien.saucez@inria.fr































Saucez                   Expires April 23, 2012                 [Page 6]

