



Network Working Group                                    D. Saucez (Ed.)
Internet-Draft                                                     INRIA
Intended status: Informational                                L. Iannone
Expires: February 20, 2014                             Telecom ParisTech
                                                                F. Coras
                                       Technical University of Catalonia
                                                         August 19, 2013


                              LISP Impact
                    draft-saucez-lisp-impact-02.txt

Abstract

   The Locator/Identifier Separation Protocol (LISP) aims at improving
   the Internet scalability properties leveraging on three simple
   principles: address role separation, encapsulation, and mapping.  In
   this document, based on implementation, deployment, and theoretical
   studies, we discuss the impact that deployment of LISP can have on
   both the Internet in general and for the end-users in particular.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 20, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect



Saucez (Ed.), et al.    Expires February 20, 2014               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                 LISP Impact                   August 2013


   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  LISP in a nutshell  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  LISP for scaling the Internet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   4.  Beyond scaling the Internet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.1.  Traffic engineering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     4.2.  IPv4/IPv6 Transition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     4.3.  Inter-domain multicast  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Impact of LISP on operations and business model . . . . . . .   7
     5.1.  Impact on non-LISP traffic and sites  . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.2.  Impact on LISP traffic and sites  . . . . . . . . . . . .   8
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   8.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
   9.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     9.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
     9.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13

1.  Introduction

   The Locator/Identifier Separation Protocol (LISP) relies on three
   simple principles to scale the Internet: address role separation,
   encapsulation, and mapping.  The main goal of LISP is to make the
   Internet more scalable by reducing the number of prefixes announced
   in the Default Free Zone (DFZ) as well as its related churn.  As LISP
   relies on mapping and encapsulation, it turns out that it provides
   more benefits than just scalability.  For example, LISP provides a
   mean for a LISP site to precisely control its inter-domain outgoing
   and incoming traffic, with the possibility to apply different
   policies to the different domains exchanging traffic with it.  LISP
   can also be used to ease the transition from IPv4 to IPv6 as it
   allows to transport IPv4 over IPv6 or IPv6 over IPv4.  Furthermore,
   LISP also provides a solution to perform inter-domain multicast.

   This document discusses the impact of LISP's deployment on the
   Internet and on end-users.  We first show that the use of an
   interworking infrastructure results in path stretch and there still
   are many, economical rather than technical, open questions related to
   the deployment of such infrastructure.  Moreover, encapsulation may
   raise some issues (that do not have a real impact in practice)
   because it reduces the Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU) size.  An



Saucez (Ed.), et al.    Expires February 20, 2014               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                 LISP Impact                   August 2013


   important impact of LISP on network operations is related to
   resiliency and troubleshooting.  Indeed, as LISP relies on cached
   mappings and on encapsulation, troubleshooting is harder than in the
   traditional Internet.  Also, end-to-end encapsulation stresses
   resiliency as it makes failure detection and recovery slower than
   with hop-by-hop routing.

2.  LISP in a nutshell

   The Locator/Identifier Separation Protocol (LISP) relies on three
   simple principles: address role separation, encapsulation, and
   mapping.

   Semantics of address are separated in two: the Routing Locators
   (RLOCs) and the Endpoint Identifiers (EIDs).  RLOCs are assigned from
   the address space of the Internet service providers (PA).  The EIDs
   are attributed, to the nodes in the edge network, by block of
   contiguous addresses extracted from the EID Space.  To limit the
   scalability problem of today's Internet, only the routes towards the
   RLOCs are announced in the Internet while EIDs are also propagated
   today.

   LISP routers are used at the boundary between the EID and the RLOC
   spaces.  Routers used to exit the EID space are called Ingress Tunnel
   Router (ITRs) and those used to enter the EID space the Egress Tunnel
   Routers (ETRs).  When a host sends a packet to a remote destination,
   it sends it as in today's Internet.  The packet eventually arrives at
   the border of its site at an ITR.  Because EIDs are not routable on
   the Internet, the packet is encapsulated with the source address set
   to the ITR RLOC and the destination address set to the ETR RLOC.  The
   encapsulated packet is then forwarded in the Internet until it
   reaches the selected ETR.  The ETR decapsulates the packet and
   forwards it to its final destination.  The acronym xTR for Ingress/
   Egress tunnel router is used for a router playing these two roles.

   The correspondence between EIDs and RLOCs is given by the mappings.
   When an ITR needs to find ETR RLOCs that serve an EID it queries the
   mapping system.  It is worth noticing that with the LISP Canonical
   Address Format (LCAF) [I-D.farinacci-lisp-lcaf], LISP is not
   restricted to the Internet Protocol for the EID addresses.  With
   LCAF, any address type can be used as EID (the address is the key for
   the mapping lookup) and LISP can then transport, for example,
   Ethernet frames over the Internet.








Saucez (Ed.), et al.    Expires February 20, 2014               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                 LISP Impact                   August 2013


   A more thorough introduction to LISP can be found in
   [I-D.ietf-lisp-introduction] and a discussion around the architecture
   in [I-D.chiappa-lisp-architecture].  The complete specifications are
   given in [RFC6830], [RFC6833], [I-D.fuller-lisp-ddt], [RFC6836],
   [RFC6832], [RFC6834], and [I-D.ietf-lisp-sec].

3.  LISP for scaling the Internet

   The first goal of LISP is to scale the Internet.  LISP improves the
   Internet's scalability because traffic engineering and stub AS
   prefixes are not propagated in the DFZ, so routing tables are smaller
   and more stable (i.e., less affected by churn).  Also, edge network
   routing tables are populated on demanded therefore, for each edge
   network they scale with the traffic matrix of the edge network and
   are independent of the Internet's size.  This scaling improvement is
   proven by several works.

   Quoitin et al. show in [QIdLB07] that the separation between locator
   and identifier roles at the network level improves the routing
   scalability by reducing the RIB size (up to one order of magnitude)
   and increases the path diversity and thus the traffic engineering
   capabilities.  In addition, Iannone and Bonaventure show in [IB07]
   that the number of mapping entries that must be supported at an ITR
   of a campus network is limited and does not represent more that 3 to
   4 Megabytes of memory.  Furthermore, they show that signaling traffic
   (i.e., Map-Request/Map-Reply packets) is in the same order of
   magnitude like DNS requests traffic and that encapsulation overhead,
   while not negligible, is very limited (in the order of few percentage
   points of the total traffic volume).  Similarly, Kim et al. show that
   the EID-to-RLOC cache size should not exceed 14 MB for an ITR
   responsible of more than 20,000 residential ADSL users at a large ISP
   [KIF11].  [IB07], [KIF11] rely on BGP and traffic traces to determine
   the number of entries to keep in the EID-to-RLOC cache.  In both
   papers, the size of the cache is inferred from the number of entries
   by considering that every EID is associated with two or three
   locators.  [S11] confirms these results by looking at the
   distribution of the number of locators per EID if LISP were deployed
   in today's Internet.  The assumptions in these studies are:

   o  contiguous addresses tend to be used similarly, EID prefixes
      follow the current BGP prefixes decomposition;

   o  EIDs are used only at the stub ASes, not in the transit ASes;

   o  the RLOCs of an EID prefix are deployed at the edge between the
      stubs owning the EID prefix and the providers and locator
      addresses are allocated in a Provider Aggregetable (PA) mode.




Saucez (Ed.), et al.    Expires February 20, 2014               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                 LISP Impact                   August 2013


   [CCD12]  generalizes the caching discussion and proposes an analytic
   model for the EID-to-RLOC cache size when prefix-level traffic has a
   stationary generating process.  The model shows that miss rate can be
   accurately predicted from the EID-to-RLOC cache size and a small set
   of easily measurable traffic parameters, meaning that operators can
   provision the EID-to-RLOC cache of their ITRs according to the miss
   rate they want to achieve for their given traffic.

4.  Beyond scaling the Internet

   Even though it is its main goal, LISP is more than just a scalability
   solution, it is also a tool to provide both incoming and outgoing
   traffic engineering [S11], can be used as an IPv6 transition at the
   routing level, and for inter-domain multicast [RFC6831],
   [I-D.coras-lisp-re].  LISP has also proven to be a good protocol for
   mobility of devices in the Internet [I-D.meyer-lisp-mn] or even
   virtual machine mobility in data centers and multi-tenant VPN,
   however, we don't further discuss these two last points as they are
   out of the scope of the charter.

4.1.  Traffic engineering

   In today's Internet, stub networks are globally routable and the
   routing system distributes the routes to reach these stubs.  On the
   contrary, the EID prefixes of a LISP site are not routable on the
   Internet and mappings are needed to determine the list of LISP
   routers to contact to send them packets.  The difference is
   significant for two reasons.  First, packets are not sent to a site
   but to a specific ingress router.  Second, a site can control the
   entry points for its traffic by controlling its mappings.

   For traffic engineering purpose, a mapping associates an EID prefix
   to a list of RLOCs.  Each RLOC is annotated with a priority and a
   weight.  When there are several RLOCs, the ITR selects the one with
   the lowest priority value and sends the encapsulated packet to this
   RLOC.  If several such RLOCs exist, then the traffic is balanced
   proportionally to their weight among the RLOCs with the lowest
   priority value.  Traffic engineering in LISP thus allows the mapping
   owner to have a fine-grained control on the primary and backup path
   its incoming and outgoing packets use.  In addition, it can share the
   load among its links.  An example of the use of such a feature is
   described in [SDIB08], where Saucez et al. show how to use LISP to
   direct different types of traffic on different links having different
   capacity.

   Traffic engineering in LISP goes one step further.  As every Map-
   Request contains the Source EID Address of the packet that caused a
   cache miss and triggered the Map-Request.  It is thus possible for a



Saucez (Ed.), et al.    Expires February 20, 2014               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                 LISP Impact                   August 2013


   mapping owner to differentiate the answer (Map-Reply) it gives to
   Map-Requests based on the requester.  This functionality is not
   available today with BGP because a domain cannot control exactly the
   routes that will be received by domains that are not in the direct
   neighborhood.

4.2.  IPv4/IPv6 Transition

   The LISP encapsulation mechanism is designed to support any
   combination of locators and identifiers address family.  It is then
   possible to bind IPv6 EIDs with IPv4 RLOCs and vice-versa.  This
   allows transporting IPv6 packets over an IPv4 network (or IPv4
   packets over an IPv6 network), making LISP a valuable mechanism to
   ease the transition to IPv6.

   A not so uncommon example is the case of the network infrastructure
   of a datacenter being IPv4-only while dual-stack front-end load
   balancers are used.  In this scenario, LISP can be used to provide
   IPv6 access to servers even though the network and the servers only
   support IPv4.  Assuming that the datacenter's ISP offers IPv6
   connectivity, the datacenter only needs to deploy one (or more)
   xTR(s) at its border with the ISP and one (or more) xTR(s) directly
   connected to the load balancers.  The xTR(s) at the ISP's border
   tunnels IPv6 packets over IPv4 to the xTR(s) directly attached to the
   load balancer.  The load balancer's xTR decapsulates the packets and
   forward them to the load balancer, which act as proxies, translating
   each IPv6 packet into an IPv4.  IPv4 packets are then sent to the
   appropriate servers.  Similarly, when the server's response arrives
   at the load balancer, the packet is translated back into an IPv6
   packet and forwarded to its xTR(s), which in turn will tunnel it
   back, over the IPv4-only infrastructure, to an xTR connected to the
   ISP.  The packet is then decapsulated and forwarded to the ISP
   natively in IPv6.

4.3.  Inter-domain multicast

   LISP has native support for multicast [RFC6831].  From the data-plane
   perspective, at a multicast enabled xTR, an EID sourced multicast
   packet is encapsulated in another multicast packet and subsequently
   forwarded in a RLOC-level distribution tree.  Therefore, xTRs must
   participate in both EID and RLOC level distribution trees.  Control-
   plane wise, since group addresses have no topological significance
   they need not be mapped.  It is worth noting that, to properly
   function inter-domain, LISP-Multicast requires that inter-domain
   multicast be prior deployed.

   [I-D.coras-lisp-re] and [CDM12] propose a technique to construct xTR
   based inter-domain multicast distribution trees.  Simulations of



Saucez (Ed.), et al.    Expires February 20, 2014               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                 LISP Impact                   August 2013


   three different management strategies for low latency content
   delivery show that such overlays can support thousands of member
   xTRs, hundreds of thousands of end-hosts and deliver content at
   latencies close to unicast ones [CDM12].  It was also observed that
   high client churn has a limited impact on performance and management
   overhead.

5.  Impact of LISP on operations and business model

   Important implementation efforts ([IOSNXOS], [OpenLISP], [LISPmob],
   and [LISPClick]) have been made to assess the specifications and
   interoperability tests [Was09] have been a success.  World-wide large
   deployment in the international lisp4.net testbed, which is currently
   composed of nodes running at least three different implementations,
   allows to learn operational matters related to LISP.

   We have to distinguish the impact of LISP on LISP sites from the
   impact on non-LISP sites.

5.1.  Impact on non-LISP traffic and sites

   LISP has no impact on traffic which has neither LISP origin nor LISP
   destination.  However, LISP can have a significant impact on traffic
   between a LISP site and a non-LISP site.  Traffic between a non-LISP
   site and a LISP site are subject to the same issues than those
   observed for LISP-to-LISP traffic (cf infra) but also have issues
   specific to the transition mechanism that allow LISP site to exchange
   packets with non-LISP site ([RFC6832], [I-D.ietf-lisp-deployment]).

   Indeed, the transition requires to setup proxy tunnel routers
   (PxTRs).  PxTRs do not cause particular technical issue.  However, by
   definition proxies cause path stretch and make troubleshooting
   harder.  There are still big questions related to PxTRs that have to
   be answered:

   o  Where to deploy PxTRs?  The placement in the topology has an
      important impact on the path stretch.

   o  How many PxTRs?  The number of PxTR has a direct impact on the
      load and the impact of the failure of a PxTR on the traffic.

   o  What part of the EID space?  Will all the PxTRs be proxies for the
      whole EID space or will it be segmented between different PxTRs?








Saucez (Ed.), et al.    Expires February 20, 2014               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                 LISP Impact                   August 2013


   o  Who to operate PxTRs?  The IETF does not aim at providing business
      model hints, however, an important question to answer is related
      to the entities that will deploy PxTRs, how they will manage their
      CAPEX/OPEX and how the traffic will be carried with respect for
      the security and privacy.

   PxTR also normally have to advertise the EID prefix they are proxy
   for in BGP.  However, if proxies are managed by different entities,
   they will belong to different ASes.  In this case, we have to be sure
   that it will not cause MOA issues that could negatively influence
   routing.  Moreover, we have to be sure that way EID prefixes will be
   deaggregated by the proxies will remain reasonable to not take part
   in the BGP scalability issues.

5.2.  Impact on LISP traffic and sites

   LISP is a protocol based on the map-and-encap paradigm which has the
   positive effects that we have given in the sections above.  However,
   by design, LISP also has side impact on operations:

   MTU issue:  as LISP uses encapsulation, the MTU is reduced (by 36
         bytes in IPv4), this has implication on potentially all the
         traffic.  However, in practice, on the lisp4.net network, no
         major issue due to the MTU has been observed.  This is probably
         due to the fact that current end-host stacks are well designed
         to deal with the problem of MTU.

   Resiliency issue:  the advantage of flexibility and control offered
         by the Locator/ID separation comes at the cost of increasing
         the complexity of the reachability detection.  Indeed,
         identifiers are not directly routable and have to be mapped to
         locators but a locator may be unreachable while others are
         still reachable.  This is an important problem for any tunnel-
         based solution.  In the current Internet, packets are forwarded
         independently of the border router of the network meaning that
         in case of the failure of a border router, another one can be
         used.  With LISP, the destination RLOC specifically designate
         one particular ETR, hence if this ETR fails, the traffic is
         dropped even though other ETRs are available for the
         destination site.  Another resiliency issue is linked to the
         fact that mappings are learned on demand.  When an ITR fails,
         all its traffic is redirected to other ITRs that might not have
         yet the mappings for the redirected traffic.  The study in
         [SKI12] and [SD12] show, based on measurements and traffic
         traces, that failure of ITRs and RLOC are infrequent but that
         when such failure happens, an important number of packet can be
         dropped.  Unfortunately, the current techniques for LISP
         resiliency, based on monitoring or probing are not rapid enough



Saucez (Ed.), et al.    Expires February 20, 2014               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                 LISP Impact                   August 2013


         (failure recovery of the order of a few seconds).  To tackle
         this issue [I-D.bonaventure-lisp-preserve] and
         [I-D.saucez-lisp-itr-graceful] propose techniques based on
         local failure detection and recovery.

   Middle boxes/filters:  because of encapsulation, the middle boxes
         might not understand the traffic which can cause firewall to
         drop legitimate packets.  In addition, LISP allows triangular
         or even rectangular routing, so it is hard to maintain a
         correct state even if the middle box perfectly understands
         LISP.  Finally, filtering might also have problems because they
         might think only one host is generating the traffic (the ITR),
         as long as it is not decapsulated.

   Troubleshooting/debugging:  the major issue years of LISP
         experimentation have shown is the difficulty of
         troubleshooting.  When there is a problem in the network, it is
         hard to pin-point the reason as the operator only has a partial
         view of the network.  The operator can see what is in its EID-
         to-RLOC cache/database, and can try to obtain what is
         potentially elsewhere by querying the Map Resolvers but the
         knowledge remains partial.  On top of that, ICMP is too small,
         which means that when an ICMP arrives at the ITR, it might not
         contain enough information to make correct troubleshooting.
         Interestingly, deployment in the beta network has shown that
         LISP+ALT was not easy to maintain and control, which explains
         the migration to LISP-DDT [I-D.fuller-lisp-ddt].

   Business:  the IETF is not aiming at providing business models.
         However, even though [IL10] shown that there is economical
         incentives to migrate to LISP, some questions are on hold.  For
         example, how will the EIDs be allocated to allow aggregation
         and hence scalability of the mapping system?  Who will operate
         the mapping system infrastructure and for what benefit?

6.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request to the IANA.

7.  Security Considerations

   Security and threats analysis of the LISP protocol is out of the
   scope of the present document.  A thorough analysis of LISP security
   threats is detailed in [I-D.ietf-lisp-threats].

8.  Acknowledgments





Saucez (Ed.), et al.    Expires February 20, 2014               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                 LISP Impact                   August 2013


   The people that contributed to this document are Albert Cabellos-
   Aparicio, Vince Fuller, Joel Halpern, Terry Manderson, and Gregg
   Schudel.

9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [I-D.fuller-lisp-ddt]
              Fuller, V., Lewis, D., Ermagan, V., and A. Jain, "LISP
              Delegated Database Tree", draft-fuller-lisp-ddt-04 (work
              in progress), September 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-lisp-deployment]
              Jakab, L., Cabellos-Aparicio, A., Coras, F., Domingo-
              Pascual, J., and D. Lewis, "LISP Network Element
              Deployment Considerations", draft-ietf-lisp-deployment-10
              (work in progress), August 2013.

   [I-D.ietf-lisp-sec]
              Maino, F., Ermagan, V., Cabellos-Aparicio, A., Saucez, D.,
              and O. Bonaventure, "LISP-Security (LISP-SEC)", draft-
              ietf-lisp-sec-04 (work in progress), October 2012.

   [RFC6830]  Farinacci, D., Fuller, V., Meyer, D., and D. Lewis, "The
              Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP)", RFC 6830, January
              2013.

   [RFC6831]  Farinacci, D., Meyer, D., Zwiebel, J., and S. Venaas, "The
              Locator/ID Separation Protocol (LISP) for Multicast
              Environments", RFC 6831, January 2013.

   [RFC6832]  Lewis, D., Meyer, D., Farinacci, D., and V. Fuller,
              "Interworking between Locator/ID Separation Protocol
              (LISP) and Non-LISP Sites", RFC 6832, January 2013.

   [RFC6833]  Fuller, V. and D. Farinacci, "Locator/ID Separation
              Protocol (LISP) Map-Server Interface", RFC 6833, January
              2013.

   [RFC6834]  Iannone, L., Saucez, D., and O. Bonaventure, "Locator/ID
              Separation Protocol (LISP) Map-Versioning", RFC 6834,
              January 2013.

   [RFC6836]  Fuller, V., Farinacci, D., Meyer, D., and D. Lewis,
              "Locator/ID Separation Protocol Alternative Logical
              Topology (LISP+ALT)", RFC 6836, January 2013.




Saucez (Ed.), et al.    Expires February 20, 2014              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                 LISP Impact                   August 2013


9.2.  Informative References

   [CCD12]    Coras, F., Cabellos-Aparicio, A., and J. Domingo-Pascual,
              "An Analytical Model for the LISP Cache Size ", In Proc.
              IFIP Networking 2012, May 2012.

   [CDM12]    Coras, F., Domingo-Pascual, J., Maino, F., Farinacci, D.,
              and A. Cabellos-Aparicio, "Lcast: Software-defined Inter-
              Domain Multicast ", Technical Report, Universitat
              Politecnica de Catalunya, 2012, July 2012.

   [I-D.bonaventure-lisp-preserve]
              Bonaventure, O., Francois, P., and D. Saucez, "Preserving
              the reachability of LISP ETRs in case of failures", draft-
              bonaventure-lisp-preserve-00 (work in progress), July
              2009.

   [I-D.chiappa-lisp-architecture]
              Art, Y., "An Architectural Perspective on the LISP
              Location-Identity Separation System", draft-chiappa-lisp-
              architecture-01 (work in progress), July 2012.

   [I-D.coras-lisp-re]
              Coras, F., Cabellos-Aparicio, A., Domingo-Pascual, J.,
              Maino, F., and D. Farinacci, "LISP Replication
              Engineering", draft-coras-lisp-re-03 (work in progress),
              July 2013.

   [I-D.farinacci-lisp-lcaf]
              Farinacci, D., Meyer, D., and J. Snijders, "LISP Canonical
              Address Format (LCAF)", draft-farinacci-lisp-lcaf-10 (work
              in progress), July 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-lisp-introduction]
              Chiappa, J., "An Architecural Introduction to the LISP
              Location-Identity Separation System", draft-ietf-lisp-
              introduction-01 (work in progress), July 2013.

   [I-D.ietf-lisp-threats]
              Saucez, D., Iannone, L., and O. Bonaventure, "LISP Threats
              Analysis", draft-ietf-lisp-threats-04 (work in progress),
              February 2013.

   [I-D.meyer-lisp-mn]
              Farinacci, D., Lewis, D., Meyer, D., and C. White, "LISP
              Mobile Node", draft-meyer-lisp-mn-09 (work in progress),
              August 2013.




Saucez (Ed.), et al.    Expires February 20, 2014              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                 LISP Impact                   August 2013


   [I-D.saucez-lisp-itr-graceful]
              Saucez, D., Bonaventure, O., Iannone, L., and C. Filsfils,
              "LISP ITR Graceful Restart", draft-saucez-lisp-itr-
              graceful-02 (work in progress), June 2013.

   [IB07]     Iannone, L. and O. Bonaventure, "On the cost of caching
              locator/id mappings ", In Proc. ACM CoNEXT 2007, December
              2007.

   [IL10]     Iannone, L. and T. Leva, "Modeling the economics of Loc/ID
              Separation for the Future Internet ", Book Chapter,
              Towards the Future Internet - Emerging Trends from the
              European Research, IOS Press, May 2010.

   [IOSNXOS]  Cisco Systems Inc., ., "Locator/ID Separation Protocol
              (LISP) ", http://lisp4.cisco.com, 2013.

   [KIF11]    Kim, J., Iannone, L., and A. Feldmann, "Deep dive into the
              lisp cache and what isps should know about it ", In Proc.
              IFIP Networking 2011, May 2011.

   [LISPClick]
              Saucez, D. and V. Nguyen, "LISP-Click: A Click
              implementation of the Locator/ID Separation Protocol ",
              1st Symposium on Click Modular Router, 2009, November
              2009.

   [LISPmob]  , "LISP Mobile Node for Linux ", http://lispmob.org, 2013.

   [OpenLISP]
              , "The OpenLISP Project ", http://www.openlisp.org, 2013.

   [QIdLB07]  Quoitin, B., Iannone, L., de Launois, C., and O.
              Bonaventure, "Evaluating the benefits of the locator/
              identifier separation ", In Proc. ACM MobiArch 2007, May
              2007.

   [S11]      Saucez, D., "Mechanisms for Interdomain Traffic
              Engineering with LISP ", PhD Thesis, Universite catholique
              de Louvain, 2011, October 2011.

   [SD12]     Saucez, D. and B. Donnet, "On the Dynamics of Locators in
              LISP ", In Proc. IFIP Networking 2012, May 2012.

   [SDIB08]   Saucez, D., Donnet, B., Iannone, L., and O. Bonaventure,
              "Interdomain Traffic Engineering in a Locator/Identifier
              Separation Context ", In Proc. of Internet Network
              Management Workshop, 2008, October 2008.



Saucez (Ed.), et al.    Expires February 20, 2014              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                 LISP Impact                   August 2013


   [SKI12]    Saucez, D., Kim, J., Iannone, L., Bonaventure, O., and C.
              Filsfils, "A Local Approach to Fast Failure Recovery of
              LISP Ingress Tunnel Routers ", In Proc. IFIP Networking
              2012, May 2012.

   [Was09]    Wasserman, M., "LISP Interoperability Testing ", IETF 76,
              LISP WG presentation, 2009., November 2009.

Authors' Addresses

   Damien Saucez
   INRIA
   2004 route des Lucioles BP 93
   06902 Sophia Antipolis Cedex
   France

   Email: damien.saucez@inria.fr


   Luigi Iannone
   Telecom ParisTech
   23, Avenue d'Italie, CS 51327
   75214 PARIS Cedex 13
   France

   Email: luigi.iannone@telecom-paristech.fr


   Florin Coras
   Technical University of Catalonia
   C/Jordi Girona, s/n
   08034 Barcelona
   Spain

   Email: fcoras@ac.upc.edu
















Saucez (Ed.), et al.    Expires February 20, 2014              [Page 13]
