


CONEX                                                         B. Briscoe
Internet-Draft                                                        BT
Intended status: Informational                                 R. Woundy
Expires: April 28, 2011                                          Comcast
                                                       T. Moncaster, Ed.
                                                           Moncaster.com
                                                          J. Leslie, Ed.
                                                                 JLC.net
                                                        October 25, 2010


                      ConEx Concepts and Use Cases
                 draft-moncaster-conex-concepts-uses-02

Abstract

   Internet Service Providers (operators) are facing problems where
   localized congestion prevents full utilization of the path between
   sender and receiver at today's "broadband" speeds.  Operators desire
   to control this congestion, which often appears to be caused by a
   small number of users consuming a large amount of bandwidth.
   Building out more capacity along all of the path to handle this
   congestion can be expensive and may not result in improvements for
   all users so network operators have sought other ways to manage
   congestion.  The current mechanisms all suffer from difficulty
   measuring the congestion (as distinguished from the total traffic).

   The ConEx Working Group is designing a mechanism to make congestion
   along any path visible at the Internet Layer.  This document
   describes example cases where this mechanism would be useful.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 28, 2011.




Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Congestion Management  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  Existing Approaches  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Exposing Congestion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     4.1.  ECN - a Step in the Right Direction  . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   5.  ConEx Use Cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.1.  ConEx as a basis for traffic management  . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.2.  ConEx to incentivise scavenger transports  . . . . . . . . 10
     5.3.  ConEx to mitigate DDoS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     5.4.  Accounting for Congestion Volume . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
     5.5.  ConEx as a form of differential QoS  . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     5.6.  Partial vs. Full Deployment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  Other issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     6.1.  Congestion as a Commercial Secret  . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
     6.2.  Information Security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   7.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   9.  Acknowledgments  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   10. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     10.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
     10.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
   Appendix A.  ConEx Architectural Elements  . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
     A.1.  ConEx Monitoring . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
       A.1.1.  Edge Monitoring  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
       A.1.2.  Border Monitoring  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
     A.2.  ConEx Policing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
       A.2.1.  Egress Policing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
       A.2.2.  Ingress Policing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
       A.2.3.  Border Policing  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25




Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


1.  Introduction

   The growth of "always on" broadband connections, coupled with the
   steady increase in access speeds [OfCom], have caused unforeseen
   problems for network operators and users alike.  Users are
   increasingly seeing congestion at peak times and changes in usage
   patterns (with the growth of real-time streaming) simply serve to
   exacerbate this.  Operators want all their users to see a good
   service but are unable to see where congestion problems originate.
   But congestion results from sharing network capacity with others, not
   merely from using it.  In general, today's "DSL" and cable-internet
   users cannot "cause" congestion in the absence of competing traffic.
   (Wireless operators and cellular internet have different tradeoffs
   which we will not discuss here.)

   Congestion generally results from the interaction of traffic from one
   network operator's users with traffic from other users.  The tools
   currently available don't allow an operator to identify which traffic
   contributes most to the congestion and so they are powerless to
   properly control it.

   While building out more capacity to handle increased traffic is
   always good, the expense and lead-time can be prohibitive, especially
   for network operators that charge flat-rate feeds to subscribers and
   are thus unable to charge heavier users more for causing more
   congestion [BB-incentive].  For an operator facing congestion caused
   by other operators' networks, building out its own capacity is
   unlikely to solve the congestion problem.  Operators are thus facing
   increased pressure to find effective solutions to dealing with the
   increasing bandwidth demands of all users.

   The growth of "scavenger" behaviour (e.g.  [LEDBAT]) helps to reduce
   congestion, but can actually make the problem less tractable.  These
   users are trying to make good use of the capacity of the path while
   minimising their own costs.  Thus, users of such services may show
   very heavy total traffic up until the moment congestion is detected
   (at the Transport Layer), but then will immediately back off.
   Monitoring (at the Internet Layer) cannot detect this congestion
   avoidance if the congestion in question is in a different domain
   further along the path; and must treat such users as congestion-
   causing users.

   The ConEx working group proposes that Internet Protocol (IP) packets
   will carry additional ConEx information.  The exact protocol details
   are not described in this document, but the ConEx information will be
   sufficient to allow any node in the network to see how much
   congestion is attributable to a given traffic flow.  See
   [ConEx-Abstract-Mech] for further details.



Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


   Changes from previous drafts (to be removed by the RFC Editor):

   From -01 to -02:

      Updated document to take account of the new Abstract Mechanism
      draft [ConEx-Abstract-Mech].  PLEASE NOTE: As that draft develops,
      it is envisaged that more material will be able to be removed from
      this document, leaving this document free to concentrate on actual
      use cases for ConEx.

      Updated the definitions section.

      Removed sections on Requirements and Mechanism.

      Moved section on ConEx Architectural Elements to appendix.

      Minor changes throughout.

   From -00 to -01:

      Changed end of Abstract to better reflect new title

      Created new section describing the architectural elements of ConEx
      Appendix A.  Added Edge Monitors and Border Monitors (other
      elements are Ingress, Egress and Border Policers).

      Extensive re-write of Section 5 partly in response to suggestions
      from Dirk Kutscher

      Improved layout of Section 2 and added definitions of Whole Path
      Congestion, ConEx-Enabled and ECN-Enabled.  Re-wrote definition of
      Congestion Volume.  Renamed Ingress and Egress Router to Ingress
      and Egress Node as these nodes may not actually be routers.

      Improved document structure.  Merged sections on Exposing
      Congestion and ECN.

      Added new section on ConEx requirements with a ConEx Issues
      subsection.  Text for these came from the start of the old ConEx
      Use Cases section

      Added a sub-section on Partial vs Full Deployment Section 5.6

      Added a discussion on ConEx as a Business Secret Section 6.1







Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


   From draft-conex-mechanism-00 to
   draft-moncaster-conex-concepts-uses-00:

      Changed filename to draft-moncaster-conex-concepts-uses.

      Changed title to ConEx Concepts and Use Cases.

      Chose uniform capitalisation of ConEx.

      Moved definition of Congestion Volume to list of definitions.

      Clarified mechanism section.  Changed section title.

      Modified text relating to conex-aware policing and policers (which
      are NOT defined terms).

      Re-worded bullet on distinguishing ConEx and non-ConEx traffic in
      Section 5.

2.  Definitions

   In this section we define a number of terms that are used throughout
   the document.  The key definition is that of congestion, which has a
   number of meanings depending on context.  The definition we use in
   this document is based on the definition in [Padhye] where congestion
   is viewed as a probability that a packet will be dropped.  This list
   of definitions is supplementary to that in [ConEx-Abstract-Mech].

   Congestion:  Congestion is a measure of the probability that a packet
      will be marked or dropped as it traverses a queue.

   flow:  a series of packets from a single sender to a single receiver
      that are treated by that sender as belonging to a single stream
      for the purposes of congestion control.  NB in general this is not
      the same as the aggregate of all traffic between the sender and
      receiver.

   Congestion-rate:  For any granularity of traffic (packet, flow,
      aggregate, etc.), the instantaneous rate of traffic discarded or
      marked due to congestion.  Conceptually, the instantaneous bit-
      rate of the traffic multiplied by the instantaneous congestion it
      is experiencing.

   Congestion-volume:  For any granularity of traffic (packet, flow,
      aggregate, etc.), the volume of bytes dropped or marked in a given
      period of time.  Conceptually, congestion-rate multipled by time.





Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


   Upstream Congestion:  the accumulated level of congestion experienced
      by a traffic flow thus far along its path.  In other words, at any
      point the Upstream Congestion is the accmulated level of
      congestion the traffic flow has experienced as it travels from the
      sender to that point.  At the receiver this is equivalent to the
      end-to-end congestion level that (usually) is reported back to the
      sender.

   Downstream Congestion:  the level of congestion a flow of traffic is
      expected to experience on the remainder of its path.  In other
      words, at any point the Downstream Congestion is the level of
      congestion the traffic flow is yet to experience as it travels
      from that point to the receiver.

   Ingress:  the first node a packet traverses that is outside the
      source's own network.  In a domestic network that will be the
      first node downstream from the home access equipment.  In an
      enterprise network this is the provider edge router.

   Egress:  the last node a packet traverses before reaching the
      receiver's network.

   ConEx-enabled:  Any piece of equipment (end-system, router, tunnel
      end-point, firewall, policer, etc) that complies with the core
      ConEx protocol, which is to be defined by the ConEx working group.
      By extension a ConEx-enabled network is a network whose edge nodes
      are all ConEx-enabled.

3.  Congestion Management

   Since 1988 the Internet architecture has made congestion management
   the responsibility of the end-systems.  The network signals
   congestion to the receiver, the receiver feeds this back to the
   sender and the sender is expected to try and reduce the traffic it
   sends.

   Any network that is persistently highly congested is inefficient.
   However the total absence of congestion is equally bad as it means
   there is spare capacity in the network that hasn't been used.  The
   long-standing aim of congestion control has been to find the point
   where these two things are in balance.

   Over recent years, some network operators have come to the view that
   end-system congestion management is insufficient.  Because of the
   heuristics used by TCP, a relatively small number of end-machines can
   get a disproportionately high share of network resources.  They have
   sought to "correct" this perceived problem by using middleboxes that
   try and reduce traffic that is causing congestion or by artificially



Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


   starving some traffic classes to create stronger congestion signals.

3.1.  Existing Approaches

   The authors have chosen not to exhaustively list current approaches
   to congestion management.  Broadly these approaches can be divided
   into those that happen at Layer 3 of the OSI model and those that use
   information gathered from higher layers.  In general these approaches
   attempt to find a "proxy" measure for congestion.  Layer 3 approaches
   include:

   o  Volume accounting -- the overall volume of traffic a given user or
      network sends is measured.  Users may be subject to an absolute
      volume cap (e.g. 10Gbytes per month) or the "heaviest" users may
      be sanctioned in some manner.

   o  Rate measurement -- the traffic rate per user or per network can
      be measured.  The absolute rate a given user sends at may be
      limited at peak hours or the average rate may be used as the basis
      for inter-network billing.

   Higher layer approaches include:

   o  Bottleneck rate policing -- bottleneck flow rate policers aim to
      share the available capacity at a given bottleneck between all
      concurrent users.

   o  DPI and application rate policing -- deep packet inspection and
      other techniques can be used to determine what application a given
      traffic flow is associated with.  Operators may then use this
      information to rate-limit or otherwise sanction certain
      applications at peak hours.

   All of these current approaches suffer from some general limitations.
   First, they introduce performance uncertainty.  Flat-rate pricing
   plans are popular because users appreciate the certainty of having
   their monthly bill amount remain the same for each billing period,
   allowing them to plan their costs accordingly.  But while flat-rate
   pricing avoids billing uncertainty, it creates performance
   uncertainty: users cannot know whether the performance of their
   connection is being altered or degraded based on how the network
   operator manages congestion.

   Second, none of the approaches is able to make use of what may be the
   most important factor in managing congestion: the amount that a given
   endpoint contributes to congestion on the network.  This information
   simply is not available to network nodes, and neither volume nor rate
   nor application usage is an adequate proxy for congestion volume,



Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


   because none of these metrics measures a user or network's actual
   contribution to congestion on the network.

   Finally, none of these solutions accounts for inter-network
   congestion.  Mechanisms may exist that allow an operator to identify
   and mitigate congestion in their own network, but the design of the
   Internet means that only the end-hosts have full visibility of
   congestion information along the whole path.  ConEx allows this
   information to be visible to everyone on the path and thus allows
   operators to make better-informed decisions about controlling
   traffic.

4.  Exposing Congestion

   We argue that current traffic-control mechanisms seek to control the
   wrong quantity.  What matters in the network is neither the volume of
   traffic nor the rate of traffic: it is the contribution to congestion
   over time -- congestion means that your traffic impacts other users,
   and conversely that their traffic impacts you.  So if there is no
   congestion there need not be any restriction on the amount a user can
   send; restrictions only need to apply when others are sending traffic
   such that there is congestion.

   For example, an application intending to transfer large amounts of
   data could use a congestion control mechanism like [LEDBAT] to reduce
   its transmission rate before any competing TCP flows do, by detecting
   an increase in end-to-end delay (as a measure of impending
   congestion).  However such techniques rely on voluntary, altruistic
   action by end users and their application providers.  Operators can
   neither enforce their use nor avoid penalizing them for congestion
   they avoid.

   The Internet was designed so that end-hosts detect and control
   congestion.  We argue that congestion needs to be visible to network
   nodes as well, not just to the end hosts.  More specifically, a
   network needs to be able to measure how much congestion any
   particular traffic expects to cause between the monitoring point in
   the network and the destination ("rest-of-path congestion").  This
   would be a new capability.  Today a network can use Explicit
   Congestion Notification (ECN) [RFC3168] to detect how much congestion
   the traffic has suffered between the source and a monitoring point,
   but not beyond.  This new capability would enable an ISP to give
   incentives for the use of LEDBAT-like applications that seek to
   minimise congestion in the network whilst restricting inappropriate
   uses of traditional TCP and UDP applications.

   So we propose a new approach which we call Congestion Exposure.  We
   propose that congestion information should be made visible at the IP



Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


   layer, so that any network node can measure the contribution to
   congestion of an aggregate of traffic as easily as straight volume
   can be measured today.  Once the information is exposed in this way,
   it is then possible to use it to measure the true impact of any
   traffic on the network.

   In general, congestion exposure gives operators a principled way to
   hold their customers accountable for the impact on others of their
   network usage and reward them for choosing congestion-sensitive
   applications.

4.1.  ECN - a Step in the Right Direction

   Explicit Congestion Notification [RFC3168] allows routers to
   explicitly tell end-hosts that they are approaching the point of
   congestion.  ECN builds on Active Queue Mechanisms such as random
   early discard (RED) [RFC2309] by allowing the router to mark a packet
   with a Congestion Experienced (CE) codepoint, rather than dropping
   it.  The probability of a packet being marked increases with the
   length of the queue and thus the rate of CE marks is a guide to the
   level of congestion at that queue.  This CE codepoint travels forward
   through the network to the receiver which then informs the sender
   that it has seen congestion.  The sender is then required to respond
   as if it had experienced a packet loss.  Because the CE codepoint is
   visible in the IP layer, this approach reveals the upstream
   congestion level for a packet.

   Alas, this is not enough - ECN gives downstream nodes an idea of the
   congestion so far for any flow.  This can help hold a receiver
   accountable for the congestion caused by incoming traffic.  But a
   receiver can only indirectly influence incoming congestion, by
   politely asking the sender to control it.  A receiver cannot make a
   sender install an adaptive codec, or install LEDBAT instead of TCP
   congestion-control.  And a receiver cannot cause an attacker to stop
   flooding it with traffic.

   What is needed is knowledge of the downstream congestion level, for
   which you need additional information that is still concealed from
   the network.

5.  ConEx Use Cases

   This section sets out some of the use cases for ConEx.  These use
   cases rely on some of the conceptual elements described in
   [ConEx-Abstract-Mech] and Appendix A.  The authors don't claim this
   is an exhaustive list of use cases, nor that these have equal merit.
   In most cases ConEx is not the only solution to achieve these.  But
   these use cases represent a consensus among people that have been



Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


   working on this approach for some years.

5.1.  ConEx as a basis for traffic management

   Currently many operators impose some form of traffic management at
   peak hours.  This is a simple economic necessity -- the only reason
   the Internet works as a commercial concern is that operators are able
   to rely on statistical multiplexing to share their expensive core
   network between large numbers of customers.  In order to ensure all
   customers get some chance to access the network, the "heaviest"
   customers will be subjected to some form of traffic management at
   peak times (typically a rate cap for certain types of traffic)
   [Fair-use].  Often this traffic management is done with expensive
   flow aware devices such as DPI boxes or flow-aware routers.

   ConEx offers a better approach that will actually target the users
   that are causing the congestion.  By using Ingress or Egress
   Policers, an ISP can identify which users are causing the greatest
   Congestion Volume throughout the network.  This can then be used as
   the basis for traffic management decisions.  The Ingress Policer
   described in [Policing-freedom] is one interesting approach that
   gives the user a congestion volume limit.  So long as they stay
   within their limit then their traffic is unaffected.  Once they
   exceed that limit then their traffic will be blocked temporarily.

5.2.  ConEx to incentivise scavenger transports

   Recent work proposes a new approach for QoS where traffic is provided
   with a less than best effort or "scavenger" quality of service.  The
   idea is that low priority but high volume traffic such as OS updates,
   P2P file transfers and view-later TV programs should be allowed to
   use any spare network capacity, but should rapidly get out of the way
   if a higher priority or interactive application starts up.  One
   solution being actively explored is LEDBAT which proposes a new
   congestion control algorithm that is less aggressive in seeking out
   bandwidth than TCP.

   At present most operators assume a strong correlation between the
   volume of a flow and the impact that flow causes in the network.
   This assumption has been eroded by the growth of interactive
   streaming which behaves in an inelastic manner and hence can cause
   high congestion at relatively low data volumes.  Currently LEDBAT-
   like transports get no incentive from the ISP since they still
   transfer large volumes of data and may reach high transfer speeds if
   the network is uncongested.  Consequently the only current incentive
   for LEDBAT is that it can reduce self-congestion effects.

   If the ISP has deployed a ConEx-aware Ingress Policer then they are



Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


   able to incentivise the use of LEDBAT because a user will be policed
   according to the overall congestion volume their traffic generates,
   not the rate or data volume.  If all background file transfers are
   only generating a low level of congestion, then the sender has more
   "congestion budget" to "spend" on their interactive applications.  It
   can be shown [Kelly] that this approach improves social welfare -- in
   other words if you limit the congestion that all users can generate
   then everyone benefits from a better service.

5.3.  ConEx to mitigate DDoS

   DDoS relies on subverting innocent end users and getting them to send
   flood traffic to a given destination.  This is intended to cause a
   rapid increase in congestion in the immediate vicinity of that
   destination.  If it fails to do this then it can't be called Denial
   of Service.  If the ingress ISP has deployed Ingress Policers, that
   ISP will effectively limit how much DDoS traffic enters the 'net.  If
   any ISP along the path has deployed Border Monitors then they will be
   able to detect a sharp rise in Congestion Volume and if they have
   Border Policers they will be able to "turn off" this traffic.  If the
   victim of the DDoS attack is behind an Egress Monitor then their ISP
   will be able to detect which traffic is causing problems.  If the
   compromised user tries to use the 'net during the DDoS attack, they
   will quickly become aware that something is wrong, and their ISP can
   show the evidence that their computer has become zombified.

   DDoS is a genuine problem and so far there is no perfect solution.
   ConEx does serve to raise the bar somewhat and can avoid the need for
   some of the more draconian measures that are currently used to
   control DDoS.  More details of this can be found in [Malice].

5.4.  Accounting for Congestion Volume

   Accountability was one of the original design goals for the Internet
   [Design-Philosophy].  At the time it was ranked low because the
   network was non-commercial and it was assumed users had the best
   interests of the network at heart.  Nowadays users generally treat
   the network as a commodity and the Internet has become highly
   commercialised.  This causes problems for operators and others which
   they have tried to solve and often leads to a tragedy of the commons
   where users end up fighting each other for scarce peak capacity.

   The most elegant solution would be to introduce an Internet-wide
   system of accountability where every actor in the network is held to
   account for the impact they have on others.  If Policers are placed
   at every Network Ingress or Egress and Border Monitors at every
   border, then you have the basis for a system of congestion
   accounting.  Simply by controlling the overall Congestion Volume each



Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


   end-system or stub-network can send you ensure everyone gets a better
   service.

5.5.  ConEx as a form of differential QoS

   Most QoS approaches require the active participation of routers to
   control the delay and loss characteristics for the traffic.  For
   real-time interactive traffic it is clear that low delay (and
   predictable jitter) are critical, and thus these probably always need
   different treatment at a router.  However if low loss is the issue
   then ConEx offers an alternative approach.

   Assuming the ingress ISP has deployed a ConEx Ingress Policer, then
   the only control on a user's traffic is dependent on the congestion
   that user has caused.  Likewise, if they are receiving traffic
   through a ConEx Egress Policer then their ISP will impose traffic
   controls (prioritisation, rate limiting, etc) based on the congestion
   they have caused.  If an end-user (be they the receiver or sender)
   wants to prioritise some traffic over other traffic then they can
   allow that traffic to generate or cause more congestion.  The price
   they will pay will be to reduce the congestion that their other
   traffic causes.

   Streaming video content-delivery is a good candidate for such ConEx-
   mediated QoS.  Such traffic can tolerate moderately high delays, but
   there are strong economic pressures to maintain a high enough data
   rate (as that will directly influence the Quality of Experience the
   end-user receives.  This approach removes the need for bandwidth
   brokers to establish QoS sessions, by removing the need to coordinate
   requests from multiple sources to pre-allocate bandwidth, as well as
   to coordinate which allocations to revoke when bandwidth predictions
   turn out to be wrong.  There is also no need to "rate-police" at the
   boundaries on a per-flow basis, removing the need to keep per-flow
   state (which in turn makes this approach more scalable).

5.6.  Partial vs. Full Deployment

   In a fully-deployed ConEx-enabled internet, [QoS-Models] shows that
   ISP settlements based on congestion volume can allocate money to
   where upgrades are needed.  Fully-deployed implies that ConEx-marked
   packets which have not exhausted their expected congestion would go
   through a congested path in preference to non-ConEx packets, with
   money changing hands to justify that priority.

   In a partial deployment, routers that ignore ConEx markings and let
   them pass unaltered are no problem unless they become congested and
   drop packets.  Since ConEx incentivises the use of lower congestion
   transports, such congestion drops should anyway become rare events.



Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


   ConEx-unaware routers that do drop ConEx-marked packets would cause a
   problem so to minimise this risk ConEx should be designed such that
   ConEx packets will appear valid to any node they traverse.  Failing
   that it could be possible to bypass such nodes with a tunnel.

   If any network is not ConEx enabled then the sender and receiver have
   to rely on ECN-marking or packet drops to establish the congestion
   level.  If the receiver isn't ConEx-enabled then there needs to be
   some form of compatibility mode.  Even in such partial deployments
   the end-users and access networks will benefit from ConEx.  This will
   put create incentives for ConEx to be more widely adopted as access
   networks put pressure on their backhaul providers to use congestion
   as the basis of their interconnect agreement.

   The actual charge per unit of congestion would be specified in an
   interconnection agreement, with economic pressure driving that charge
   downward to the cost to upgrade whenever alternative paths are
   available.  That charge would most likely be invisible to the
   majority of users.  Instead such users will have a contractual
   allowance to cause congestion, and would see packets dropped when
   that allowance is depleted.

   Once an Autonomous System (AS) agrees to pay any congestion charges
   to any other AS it forwards to, it has an economic incentive to
   increase congestion-so-far marking for any congestion within its
   network.  Failure to do this quickly becomes a significant cost,
   giving it an incentive to turn on such marking.

   End users (or the writers of the applications they use) will be given
   an incentive to use a congestion control that back off more
   aggressively than TCP for any elastic traffic.  Indeed they will
   actually have an incentive to use fully weighted congestion controls
   that allow traffic to cause congestion in proportion to its priority.
   Traffic which backs off more aggressively than TCP will see
   congestion charges remain the same (or even drop) as congestion
   increases; traffic which backs off less aggressively will see charges
   rise, but the user may be prepared to accept this if it is high-
   priority traffic; traffic which backs off not at all will see charges
   rise dramatically.

6.  Other issues

6.1.  Congestion as a Commercial Secret

   Network operators have long viewed the congestion levels in their
   network as a business secret.  In some ways this harks back to the
   days of fixed-line telecommunications where congestion manifested as
   failed connections or dropped calls.  But even in modern data-centric



Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


   packet networks congestion is viewed as a secret not to be shared
   with competitors.  It can be debated whether this view is sensible,
   but it may make operators uneasy about deploying ConEx.  The
   following two examples highlight some of the arguments used:

   o  An ISP buys backhaul capacity from an operator.  Most operators
      want their customers to get a decent service and so they want the
      backhaul to be relatively uncongested.  If there is competition,
      operators will seek to reassure their customers (the operators)
      that their network is not congested in order to attract their
      custom.  Some operators may see ConEx as a threat since it will
      enable those operators to see the actual congestion in their
      network.  On the other hand, operators with low congestion could
      use ConEx to show how well their network performs, and so might
      have an incentive to enable it.

   o  Operators would like to be part of the lucrative content provision
      market.  Currently the ISP can gain a competitive edge as it can
      put its own content in a higher QoS class, whereas traffic from
      content providers has to use the Best Effort class.  The ISP may
      take the view that if they can conceal the congestion level in
      their Best Effort class this will make it harder for the content
      provider to maintain a good level of QoS.  But in reality the
      Content Provider will just use the feedback mechanisms in
      streaming protocols such as Adobe Flash to monitor the congestion.

   Of course some might say that the idea of keeping congestion secret
   is silly.  After all, end-hosts already have knowledge of the
   congestion throughout the network, albeit only along specific paths,
   and operators can work out that there is persistent congestion as
   their customers will be suffering degraded network performance.

6.2.  Information Security

   make a source believe it has seen more congestion than it has

   hijack a user's identity and make it appear they are dishonest at an
   egress policer

   clear or otherwise tamper with the ConEx markings

   ...

   {ToDo} Write these up properly...







Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


7.  Security Considerations

   This document proposes a mechanism tagging onto Explicit Congestion
   Notification [RFC3168], and inherits the security issues listed
   therein.  The additional issues from ConEx markings relate to the
   degree of trust each forwarding point places in the ConEx markings it
   receives, which is a business decision mostly orthogonal to the
   markings themselves.

   One expected use of exposed congestion information is to hold the
   end-to-end transport and the network accountable to each other.  The
   network cannot be relied on to report information to the receiver
   against its interest, and the same applies for the information the
   receiver feeds back to the sender, and that the sender reports back
   to the network.  Looking at each in turn:

   The Network  In general it is not in any network's interest to under-
      declare congestion since this will have potentially negative
      consequences for all users of that network.  It may be in its
      interest to over-declare congestion if, for instance, it wishes to
      force traffic to move away to a different network or simply to
      reduce the amount of traffic it is carrying.  Congestion Exposure
      itself won't significantly alter the incentives for and against
      honest declaration of congestion by a network, but we can imagine
      applications of Congestion Exposure that will change these
      incentives.  There is a perception among network operators that
      their level of congestion is a business secret.  Today, congestion
      is one of the worst-kept secrets a network has, because end-hosts
      can see congestion better than network operators can.  Congestion
      Exposure will enable network operators to pinpoint whether
      congestion is on one side or the other of any border.  It is
      conceivable that forwarders with underprovisioned networks may try
      to obstruct deployment of Congestion Exposure.

   The Receiver  Receivers generally have an incentive to under-declare
      congestion since they generally wish to receive the data from the
      sender as rapidly as possible.  [Savage] explains how a receiver
      can significantly improve their throughput my failing to declare
      congestion.  This is a problem with or without Congestion
      Exposure.  [KGao] explains one possible technique to encourage
      receiver's to be honest in their declaration of congestion.

   The Sender  One proposed mechanism for Congestion Exposure deployment
      adds a requirement for a sender to advise the network how much
      congestion it has suffered or caused.  Although most senders
      currently respond to congestion they are informed of, one use of
      exposed congestion information might be to encourage sources of
      persistent congestion to back off more aggressively.  Then clearly



Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


      there may be an incentive for the sender to under-declare
      congestion.  This will be a particular problem with sources of
      flooding attacks.  "Policing" mechanisms have been proposed to
      deal with this.

   In addition there are potential problems from source spoofing.  A
   malicious sender can pretend to be another user by spoofing the
   source address.  Congestion Exposure allows for "Policers" and
   "Traffic Shapers" so as to be robust against injection of false
   congestion information into the forward path.

8.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not require actions by IANA.

9.  Acknowledgments

   Bob Briscoe is partly funded by Trilogy, a research project (ICT-
   216372) supported by the European Community under its Seventh
   Framework Programme.  The views expressed here are those of the
   author only.

   The authors would like to thank Contributing Authors Bernard Aboba,
   Joao Taveira Araujo, Louise Burness, Alissa Cooper, Philip Eardley,
   Michael Menth, and Hannes Tschofenig for their inputs to this
   document.  Useful feedback was also provided by Dirk Kutscher.

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC3168]                                  Ramakrishnan, K., Floyd,
                                              S., and D. Black, "The
                                              Addition of Explicit
                                              Congestion Notification
                                              (ECN) to IP", RFC 3168,
                                              September 2001.

10.2.  Informative References

   [BB-incentive]                             MIT Communications Futures
                                              Program (CFP) and
                                              Cambridge University
                                              Communications Research
                                              Network, "The Broadband
                                              Incentive Problem",
                                              September 2005.




Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


   [ConEx-Abstract-Mech]                      Briscoe, B., "Congestion
                                              Exposure (ConEx) Concepts
                                              and Abstract Mechanism", d
                                              raft-mathis-conex-
                                              abstract-mech-00 (work in
                                              progress), October 2010.

   [Design-Philosophy]                        Clarke, D., "The Design
                                              Philosophy of the DARPA
                                              Internet Protocols", 1988.

   [Fair-use]                                 Broadband Choices, "Truth
                                              about 'fair usage'
                                              broadband", 2009.

   [Fairer-faster]                            Briscoe, B., "A Fairer
                                              Faster Internet Protocol",
                                              IEEE Spectrum Dec 2008
                                              pp38-43, December 2008.

   [I-D.briscoe-tsvwg-re-ecn-tcp-motivation]  Briscoe, B., Jacquet, A.,
                                              Moncaster, T., and A.
                                              Smith, "Re-ECN: A
                                              Framework for adding
                                              Congestion Accountability
                                              to TCP/IP", draft-briscoe-
                                              tsvwg-re-ecn-tcp-
                                              motivation-01 (work in
                                              progress), September 2009.

   [KGao]                                     Gao, K. and C. Wang,
                                              "Incrementally Deployable
                                              Prevention to TCP Attack
                                              with Misbehaving
                                              Receivers", December 2004.

   [Kelly]                                    Kelly, F., Maulloo, A.,
                                              and D. Tan, "Rate control
                                              for communication
                                              networks: shadow prices,
                                              proportional fairness and
                                              stability", Journal of the
                                              Operational Research
                                              Society 49(3) 237--252,
                                              1998, <http://
                                              www.statslab.cam.ac.uk/
                                              ~frank/rate.html>.




Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


   [LEDBAT]                                   Shalunov, S., "Low Extra
                                              Delay Background Transport
                                              (LEDBAT)", draft-ietf-
                                              ledbat-congestion-01 (work
                                              in progress), March 2010.

   [Malice]                                   Briscoe, B., "Using Self
                                              Interest to Prevent
                                              Malice; Fixing the Denial
                                              of Service Flaw of the
                                              Internet", WESII -
                                              Workshop on the Economics
                                              of Securing the
                                              Information
                                              Infrastructure 2006, 2006,
                                              <http://
                                              wesii.econinfosec.org/
                                              draft.php?paper_id=19>.

   [OfCom]                                    Ofcom: Office of
                                              Communications, "UK
                                              Broadband Speeds 2008:
                                              Research report",
                                              January 2009.

   [Padhye]                                   Padhye, J., Firoiu, V.,
                                              Towsley, D., and J.
                                              Kurose, "Modeling TCP
                                              Throughput: A Simple Model
                                              and its Empirical
                                              Validation", ACM SIGCOMM
                                              Computer Communications
                                              Review Vol 28(4), pages
                                              303-314, May 1998.

   [Policing-freedom]                         Briscoe, B., Jacquet, A.,
                                              and T. Moncaster,
                                              "Policing Freedom to Use
                                              the Internet Resource
                                              Pool", RE-Arch 2008 hosted
                                              at the 2008 CoNEXT
                                              conference ,
                                              December 2008.

   [QoS-Models]                               Briscoe, B. and S. Rudkin,
                                              "Commercial Models for IP
                                              Quality of Service
                                              Interconnect", BTTJ



Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


                                              Special Edition on IP
                                              Quality of Service vol 23
                                              (2), April 2005.

   [RFC2309]                                  Braden, B., Clark, D.,
                                              Crowcroft, J., Davie, B.,
                                              Deering, S., Estrin, D.,
                                              Floyd, S., Jacobson, V.,
                                              Minshall, G., Partridge,
                                              C., Peterson, L.,
                                              Ramakrishnan, K., Shenker,
                                              S., Wroclawski, J., and L.
                                              Zhang, "Recommendations on
                                              Queue Management and
                                              Congestion Avoidance in
                                              the Internet", RFC 2309,
                                              April 1998.

   [Re-Feedback]                              Briscoe, B., Jacquet, A.,
                                              Di Cairano-Gilfedder, C.,
                                              Salvatori, A., Soppera,
                                              A., and M. Koyabe,
                                              "Policing Congestion
                                              Response in an
                                              Internetwork Using Re-
                                              Feedback", ACM SIGCOMM
                                              CCR 35(4)277--288,
                                              August 2005, <http://
                                              www.acm.org/sigs/sigcomm/
                                              sigcomm2005/
                                              techprog.html#session8>.

   [Savage]                                   Savage, S., Wetherall, D.,
                                              and T. Anderson, "TCP
                                              Congestion Control with a
                                              Misbehaving Receiver", ACM
                                              SIGCOMM Computer
                                              Communication Review ,
                                              1999.

   [re-ecn-motive]                            Briscoe, B., Jacquet, A.,
                                              Moncaster, T., and A.
                                              Smith, "Re-ECN: A
                                              Framework for adding
                                              Congestion Accountability
                                              to TCP/IP", draft-briscoe-
                                              tsvwg-re-ecn-tcp-
                                              motivation-01 (work in



Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


                                              progress), September 2009.

Appendix A.  ConEx Architectural Elements

   ConEx is a simple concept that has revolutionary implications.  It is
   that rare thing -- a truly disruptive technology, and as such it is
   hard to imagine the variety of uses it may be put to.  Before even
   thinking what it might be used for we need to address the issue of
   how it can be used.  This section describes four architectural
   elements that can be placed in the network and which utilise ConEx
   information to monitor or control traffic flows.

   In the following we are assuming the most abstract version of the
   ConEx mechanism, namely that every packet carries two congestion
   fields, one for upstream congestion and one for downstream.
   [ConEx-Abstract-Mech] outlines one possible approach for this.

A.1.  ConEx Monitoring

   One of the most useful things ConEx provides is the ability to
   monitor (and control) the amount of congestion entering or leaving a
   network.  With ConEx, each packet carries sufficient information to
   work out the Upstream, Downstream and Total Congestion Volume that
   packet is responsible for.  This allows the overall Congestion Volume
   to be calculated at any point in the network.  In effect this gives a
   measure of how much excess traffic has been sent that was above the
   instantaneous transmission capacity of the network.  A 1 Gbps router
   that is 0.1% congested implies that there is 1 Mbps of excess traffic
   at that point in time.

   The figure below shows 2 conceptual pieces of network equipment that
   utilise ConEx information in order to monitor the flow of congestion
   through the network.  The Border Monitor sits at the border between
   two networks, while the Edge Monitor sits at the Ingress or Egress to
   the Internetwork.

                       ,---.              ,---.
            ,-----.   /     \  ,------.  /     \   ,------.  ,-----.
            | Src |--( Net A )-| B.M. |-( Net B )--| E.M. |--| Dst |
            '-----`   \     /  '------`  \     /   '------`  '-----`
                       '---`      ^       '---`        ^
                            Border Monitor         Edge Monitor
        NB, the Edge Monitor could also be at the Src end of the network

               Figure 1: Ingress, egress and border monitors

   Note: In the tables below, ConEx-Enabled is as defined in Section 2
   and ECN-enabled means any router that fully enables Explicit



Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


   Congestion Notification (ECN) as defined in [RFC3168] and any
   relevant updates to that standard.

A.1.1.  Edge Monitoring

   +------------+----------------+----------------+--------------------+
   |   Network  |  ECN-Enabled?  | ConEx-Enabled? |        Notes       |
   |   Element  |                |                |                    |
   +------------+----------------+----------------+--------------------+
   |   Sender   | Yes, if ECN is |  Yes, must be  |  Must be receiving |
   |            |  used as basis |  sending ConEx |     congestion     |
   |            | for congestion |   information  |      feedback      |
   |            |     signal     |                |                    |
   |  Sender's  |  ECN would be  |     Should     |   NB, it doesn't   |
   |   Network  |   beneficial   |   understand   |  have to be fully  |
   |            |                | ConEx markings |    ConEx-Enabled   |
   |    Core    |  ECN would be  |     Needn't    |   ConEx markings   |
   |   Network  |   beneficial   |   understand   |  must get through  |
   |            |                |      ConEx     |     the network    |
   | Receiver's |  ECN would be  |     Should     | Deosn't have to be |
   |   Network  |   beneficial   |   understand   |        fully       |
   |            |                | ConEx markings |    ConEx-Enabled   |
   |  Receiver  | Only needed if |     Should     |   Has to feedback  |
   |            |   network is   |   understand   |  the congestion it |
   |            |   ECN-Enabled  |      ConEx     |  sees (either ECN  |
   |            |                |                |      or drop)      |
   +------------+----------------+----------------+--------------------+

                 Table 1: Requirements for Edge Monitoring

   Edge Monitors are ideally positioned to verify the accuracy of ConEx
   markings.  If there is an imbalance between the expected congestion
   and the actual congestion then this will show up at the egress.  Edge
   Monitors can also be used by an operator to measure the service a
   given customer is receiving by monitoring how much congestion their
   traffic is causing.  This may allow them to take pre-emptive action
   if they detect any anomalies.














Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


A.1.2.  Border Monitoring

   +------------+-----------------+-----------------+------------------+
   |   Network  |   ECN-Enabled?  |  ConEx-Enabled? |       Notes      |
   |   Element  |                 |                 |                  |
   +------------+-----------------+-----------------+------------------+
   |   Sender   |     Must be     |   Yes, must be  |   Must receive   |
   |            |  ECN-enabled if |  sending ConEx  |     accurate     |
   |            |    any of the   |   information   |    congestion    |
   |            |    network is   |                 |     feedback     |
   |  Sender's  |  ECN should be  |      Should     | Ideally would be |
   |   Network  |     enabled     |    understand   |   ConEx-Enabled  |
   |            |                 |  ConEx markings |                  |
   |    Core    |  ECN should be  |      Should     | Ideally would be |
   |   Network  |     enabled     |    understand   |   ConEx-Enabled  |
   |            |                 |  ConEx markings |                  |
   | Receiver's |  ECN should be  |      Should     | Ideally would be |
   |   Network  |     enabled     |    understand   |   ConEx-Enabled  |
   |            |                 |  ConEx markings |                  |
   |  Receiver  |     Must be     |  Must be ConEx  |  Receiver has to |
   |            |  ECN-enabled if |     enabled     |   feedback the   |
   |            |    any of the   |                 |   congestion it  |
   |            |    network is   |                 |       sees       |
   +------------+-----------------+-----------------+------------------+

                Table 2: Requirements for Border Monitoring

   At any border between 2 networks, the operator can see the total
   Congestion Volume that is being forwarded into its network by the
   neighbouring network.  A Border Monitor is able to measure the bulk
   congestion markings and establish the flow of Congestion Volume each
   way across the border.  This could be used as the basis for inter-
   network settlements.  It also provides information to target upgrades
   to where they are actually needed and might help to identify network
   problems.  Border Monitoring really needs the majority of the network
   to be ECN-Enabled in order to provide the necessary Upstream
   Congestion signal.  Clearly the greatest benefit comes when there is
   also ConEx deployment in the nnetwork.  However, as long as the
   sender is sending accurate ConEx information and the majority of the
   network is ECN-enabled, border monitoring will work.

A.2.  ConEx Policing

   As shown above, ConEx gives an easy method of measuring Congestion
   Volume.  This information can be used as a control metric for making
   traffic management decisions (such as deciding which traffic to
   prioritise) or to identify and block sources of persistent and
   damaging congestion.  Simple policer mechanisms, such as those



Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


   described in [Policing-freedom] and [re-ecn-motive], can control the
   overall congestion volume traversing a network.  Ingress Policing
   typically happens at the Ingress Node, Egress Policing typically
   happens at the Egress Node and Border Policing can happen at any
   border between two networks.  The current charter concentrates on use
   cases employing Egress Policers.

                           ,---.              ,---.
      +-----+  +------+   /     \  +------+  /     \   +------+  +-----+
      | Src |--| I.P. |--( Net A )-| B.P. |-( Net B )--| E.P. |--| Dst |
      +-----+  +------+   \     /  +------+  \     /   +------+  +-----+
                  ^        '---`      ^       '---`        ^
            Ingress Policer     Border Policer       Egress Policer

               Figure 2: Ingress, egress and border policers

A.2.1.  Egress Policing

   +------------+--------------+----------------+----------------------+
   |   Network  | ECN-Enabled? | ConEx-Enabled? |         Notes        |
   |   Element  |              |                |                      |
   +------------+--------------+----------------+----------------------+
   |   Sender   |  The sender  |     Must be    |   Must be receiving  |
   |            |   should be  |  ConEx-Enabled |  congestion feedback |
   |            |  ECN-enabled |                |                      |
   |            |   if any of  |                |                      |
   |            |  the network |                |                      |
   |            |      is      |                |                      |
   |  Sender's  |    ECN is    |    ConEx is    |  ConEx would enable  |
   |   Network  | optional but |    optional    |  them to do Ingress  |
   |            |  beneficial  |                | Policing (see later) |
   |    Core    |    ECN is    |   Not needed   |   ConEx marks must   |
   |   Network  | optional but |                | survive crossing the |
   |            |  beneficial  |                |        network       |
   | Receiver's |    ECN is    |   Must fully   |  Each receiver needs |
   |   Network  | optional but |   understand   |   an Egress Policer  |
   |            |  beneficial  |      ConEx     |                      |
   |  Receiver  |   Should be  |     Should     |   Must feedback the  |
   |            |  ECN-enabled |   understand   | congestion it sees.  |
   |            |   if any of  |      ConEx     |   ConEx may have a   |
   |            |  the network |                |  compatibility mode  |
   |            |      is      |                |  if the receiver is  |
   |            |              |                |   not ConEx-Enabled  |
   +------------+--------------+----------------+----------------------+

                   Table 3: Egress Policer Requirements

   An Egress Policer allows an ISP to monitor the Congestion Volume a



Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


   user's traffic has caused throughout the network, and then use this
   to prioritise the traffic accordingly.  By itself, such a policer
   cannot tell how much of this congestion was caused in the ISP's own
   network, but it will identify which users are the "heaviest" in terms
   of the congestion they have caused.  Assuming the ConEx information
   is accurate then the Egress Policer will be able to see how much
   congestion exists between it and the final destination (what you
   might call "last-mile" congestion).  There are a number of strategies
   that could be used to determine how traffic is treated by an Egress
   Policer.  Obviously traffic that is not ConEx enabled needs to
   receive some form of "default" treatment.  Traffic that is ConEx
   enabled may have under-declared congestion in which case it would be
   reasonable to give it a low scheduling priority.  Traffic that
   appears to be over-declaring congestion may be simply a result of
   especially high "last-mile" congestion, in which case the ISP may
   want to upgrade the access capacity, or may want to try and reduce
   the volume of traffic.  Where the ISP knows what the "last-mile"
   congestion is (for instance if it is able to measure several users
   sharing that same capacity) then any remaining over-declared
   congestion might be seen as a signal that the sender wishes to
   prioritise this traffic.

A.2.2.  Ingress Policing

   +------------+--------------+----------------+----------------------+
   |   Network  | ECN-Enabled? | ConEx-Enabled? |         Notes        |
   |   Element  |              |                |                      |
   +------------+--------------+----------------+----------------------+
   |   Sender   |   Should be  |     Must be    |   Must be receiving  |
   |            |  ECN-enabled |  ConEx-enabled |  congestion feedback |
   |  Sender's  |    ECN is    |      Must      |                      |
   |   Network  | optional but |   understand   |                      |
   |            |  beneficial  |      ConEx     |                      |
   |    Core    |    ECN is    |     Needn't    |  ConEx markings must |
   |   Network  | optional but |   understand   | survive crossing the |
   |            |  beneficial  |      ConEx     |        network       |
   | Receiver's |    ECN is    |     Needn't    |  ConEx markings must |
   |   Network  | optional but |   understand   | survive crossing the |
   |            |  beneficial  |      ConEx     |        network       |
   |  Receiver  |   Should be  |    Should be   |   Must feedback the  |
   |            |  ECN-enabled |  ConEx-Enabled | congestion it sees.  |
   |            |   if any of  |                |   ConEx may have a   |
   |            |  the network |                |  compatibility mode  |
   |            |      is      |                |  if the receiver is  |
   |            |              |                |   not ConEx-Enabled  |
   +------------+--------------+----------------+----------------------+

                   Table 4: Ingress Policer Requirements



Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


   At the Network Ingress, an ISP can police the amount of congestion a
   user is causing by limiting the congestion volume they send into the
   network.  One system that achieves this is described in
   [Policing-freedom].  This uses a modified token bucket to limit the
   congestion rate being sent rather than the overall rate.  Such
   Ingress policing is relatively simple as it requires no flow state.
   Furthermore, unlike many mechanisms, it treats all a user's packets
   equally.

A.2.3.  Border Policing

   +------------+--------------+----------------+----------------------+
   |   Network  | ECN-Enabled? | ConEx-Enabled? |         Notes        |
   |   Element  |              |                |                      |
   +------------+--------------+----------------+----------------------+
   |   Sender   |  ECN should  |     Must be    |     Must receive     |
   |            |  be enabled  |  ConEx-enabled |  accurate congestion |
   |            |              |                |       feedback       |
   |  Sender's  |    ECN is    |     Must be    |                      |
   |   Network  | optional but |  ConEx-enabled |                      |
   |            |  beneficial  |                |                      |
   |    Core    |    ECN is    |    Should be   |        Must be       |
   |   Network  | optional but |  ConEx-Enabled |  ConEx-Enabled if it |
   |            |  beneficial  |                |     is doing the     |
   |            |              |                |    policing.  At a   |
   |            |              |                |   minimum must pass  |
   |            |              |                |    ConEx markings    |
   |            |              |                |       unaltered      |
   | Receiver's |    ECN is    |    Should be   |   At a minimum must  |
   |   Network  | optional but |  ConEx-Enabled |  pass ConEx markings |
   |            |  beneficial  |                |       unaltered      |
   |  Receiver  |   Should be  |    Should be   |   Must feedback the  |
   |            |  ECN-Enabled |  ConEx-Enabled | congestion it sees.  |
   |            |   if any of  |                |   ConEx may have a   |
   |            |  the network |                |  compatibility mode  |
   |            |      is      |                |  if the receiver is  |
   |            |              |                |   not ConEx-Enabled  |
   +------------+--------------+----------------+----------------------+

                   Table 5: Border Policer Requirements

   A Border Policer will allow an operator to directly control the
   congestion that it allows into its network.  Normally we would expect
   the controls to be related to some form of contractual obligation
   between the two parties.  However, such Policing could also be used
   to mitigate some effects of Distributed Denial of Service (see
   Section 5.3).  In effect a Border Policer encourages the network
   upstream to take responsibility for congestion it will cause



Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 25]

Internet-Draft               ConEx Mechanism                October 2010


   downstream and could be seen as an incentive for that network to
   participate in ConEx (e.g. install Ingress Policers)

Authors' Addresses

   Bob Briscoe
   BT
   B54/77, Adastral Park
   Martlesham Heath
   Ipswich  IP5 3RE
   UK

   Phone: +44 1473 645196
   EMail: bob.briscoe@bt.com
   URI:   http://bobbriscoe.net/


   Richard Woundy
   Comcast
   Comcast Cable Communications
   27 Industrial Avenue
   Chelmsford, MA  01824
   US

   EMail: richard_woundy@cable.comcast.com
   URI:   http://www.comcast.com


   Toby Moncaster (editor)
   Moncaster.com
   Dukes
   Layer Marney
   Colchester  CO5 9UZ
   UK

   EMail: toby@moncaster.com


   John Leslie (editor)
   JLC.net
   10 Souhegan Street
   Milford, NH  03055
   US

   EMail: john@jlc.net






Briscoe, et al.          Expires April 28, 2011                [Page 26]


