


Congestion Exposure                                    T. Moncaster, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                   L. Krug
Intended status: Informational                                        BT
Expires: April 18, 2010                                         M. Menth
                                                 University of Wuerzburg
                                                               J. Araujo
                                                                     UCL
                                                                S. Blake
                                                        Extreme Networks
                                                               R. Woundy
                                                                 Comcast
                                                        October 15, 2009


            The Need for Congestion Exposure in the Internet
             draft-moncaster-congestion-exposure-problem-01

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 18, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).



Moncaster, et al.        Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem          October 2009


   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   The success of the Internet is largely down to the elegant manner in
   which it shares capacity amongst all users while avoiding congestion
   collapse.  However this relies on the cooperation of all end users to
   work efficiently.  Increasingly a small minority of users are able to
   grab larger and larger shares of the network leading ISPs to impose
   arbitrary controls on traffic.  These controls set ISPs on a direct
   collision course with their customers and the regulators.

   The root of the problem lies in the fact the ISPs are unable to see
   the most important information about the traffic - namely the amount
   of congestion that traffic is going to cause in the network.  We
   propose congestion exposure as a possible solution.  Every packet
   will carry an accurate prediction of the congestion it expects to
   cause downstream.  This memo sets out the motivations for congestion
   exposure and introduces a strawman protocol designed to achieve
   congestion exposure.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
     1.1.  Definitions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  The Problem  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.1.  The Impact of Congestion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     2.2.  Making Congestion Visible  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     2.3.  ECN - a Step in the Right Directions . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Existing Approaches to Traffic Control . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
     3.1.  Passive Measurement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       3.1.1.  Volume Accounting  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
       3.1.2.  Rate Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     3.2.  Active Discrimination  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       3.2.1.  Bottleneck Rate Policing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       3.2.2.  DPI and Application Rate Policing  . . . . . . . . . .  7
   4.  Why Now? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Requirements for a Solution  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  A Strawman Congestion Exposure Protocol  . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  Use Cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   10. Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   11. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
   12. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11





Moncaster, et al.        Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem          October 2009


1.  Introduction

   The Internet has grown from humble origins to become a global
   phenomenon with billions of end-users able to share the network and
   exchange data and more.  One of the key elements in this success has
   been the use of distributed algorithms such as TCP that share
   capacity while avoiding congestion collapse.  These algorithms rely
   on the end-users altruistically reducing their transmission rate in
   response to any congestion they see.

   In recent years ISPs have seen small minority of customers taking a
   large share of the network by using protocols that open multiple
   simultaneous TCP connections and by remaining connected for hours or
   even days at a time.  This issue first came to the fore with the
   advent of "always on" broadband connections.  Frequently peer to peer
   protocols have been held responsible [RFC5594] but streaming video
   traffic is becoming increasingly significant.  In order to improve
   the network experience for the majority of their customers, many ISPs
   have imposed controls on how their network's capacity is shared.
   Approaches include volume counting or charging, and application rate
   limiting.  Typically these traffic controls, whilst not impacting
   most customers, set a restriction on a customer's level of network
   usage, as defined in a "fair usage policy".

   We believe that such traffic controls seek to control the wrong
   quantity.  What matters in the network is neither the volume of
   traffic nor the rate of traffic, it is the amount of congestion -
   congestion means that your traffic impacts other users, and
   conversely that their traffic impacts you.  So if there is little
   other traffic there should be no restriction on the amount a user can
   send; restrictions should only apply when others are sending a lot of
   traffic such that there is congestion.  In fact some of the current
   work at the IETF [LEDBAT] and IRTF [CC-open-research] already reflect
   this thinking.  For example, a LEDBAT user reduces their transmission
   rate when they detect an increase in end-to-end delay (as a measure
   of incipient congestion).  However, these techniques at the moment
   rely on voluntary, altruistic action by end users.  ISPs cannot
   enforce their use.  This leads to our second point.

   We believe that congestion needs to be visible to network nodes and
   not just to the end hosts as is the case today.  By this we mean that
   a network can detect how much congestion traffic causes between a
   point in the network and the destination ("rest-of-path congestion").
   This capability is new; today a network can only detect how much
   congestion traffic has suffered between the source and a point in the
   network.  Such a capability enables an ISP to give incentives for the
   use, without restrictions, of LEDBAT-like applications whilst perhaps
   restricting TCP and UDP ones.



Moncaster, et al.        Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem          October 2009


   So we propose a new approach which we call congestion exposure.  We
   propose that congestion information should be made visible at the IP
   layer, where it is accessible by any application or transport
   protocol.  Once the information is exposed in this way, it is then
   possible to use it to measure the true impact of any traffic on the
   network.  One use of this information would be to measure the
   congestion attributable to a given application or user and thereby
   incentivise the use of protocols such as [LEDBAT] which aim to reduce
   the congestion caused by bulk data transfers. {ToDo}It is possible to
   imagine many other ways to use the exposed congestion information
   [maybe a forward ref?].

1.1.  Definitions

   Throughout this document we use two terms that need to be carefully
   defined to avoid ambiguity:

      Upstream congestion is defined as the congestion that has already
      been experienced by a packet as it travels along its path.  In
      other words at any point on the path it is the congestion between
      that point and the source of the packet.

      Downstream congestion is defined as the congestion that a packet
      still has to experience on the remainder of its path.  In other
      words at any point it is the congestion still to be experienced as
      the packet travels between that point and ts destination.

2.  The Problem

   ISPs are facing a quandary - traffic is growing rapidly yet they know
   that any increases in capacity will be of most benefit to the most
   aggressive users.  At the same time, traffic patterns are changing
   significantly [Cisco-VNI] and all the while increasing competition is
   squeezing their profit margins.  Faced with these problems, some ISPs
   are seeking to reduce what they regard as "heavy usage" in order to
   improve the service experienced by the majority of their customers.

2.1.  The Impact of Congestion

   As the Internet has grown, access rates have lagged behind those in
   the core.  However over recent years this has started to change.
   Increasingly large numbers of people now access the network via
   broadband connections and the speed they can get is steadily
   increasing.  Alongside this have gone significant changes in traffic
   patterns.  We have been through a boom in large-scale data transfer
   by peer to peer networks and now are seeing an even larger boom in
   streaming media with applications such as the BBC iPlayer becoming
   increasingly popular.  The main effect of this has been that users



Moncaster, et al.        Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem          October 2009


   now routinely see their network connections running slow in the
   evenings [OfCom].

2.2.  Making Congestion Visible

   Unfortunately ISPs are only able to see limited information about the
   traffic they forward.  As we will see in section 3 they are forced to
   use the only information they do have available which leads to myopic
   control that has scant regard for the actual impact of the traffic or
   the underlying network conditions.  All their approaches are flawed
   because they measure the wrong metric.  The volume or rate of a given
   flow doesn't directly affect other users, but the congestion the flow
   causes does.  This can be seen with a simple illustration.  A 5Mbps
   flow in an otherwise empty 10Mbps bottleneck causes no congestion and
   so affects no other users.  By contrast a 1Mbps flow entering a
   10Mbps bottleneck that is already fully occupied causes significant
   congestion and impacts every other user sharing that bottleneck.  So
   the real problem that needs to be addressed is how to close this
   information gap.  How can we expose congestion at the IP layer so
   that it can be used as the basis for measuring the impact of any
   traffic on the network as a whole?

2.3.  ECN - a Step in the Right Directions

   Explicit Congestion Notification [RFC3168] allows routers to
   explicitly tell end-hosts that they are approaching the point of
   congestion.  ECN builds on Active Queue Mechanisms such as random
   early discard (RED) [RFC2309] by allowing the router to mark a packet
   with a Congestion Experienced (CE) codepoint, rather than dropping
   it.  The probability of a packet being marked increases with the
   length of the queue and thus the rate of CE marks is a guide to the
   level of congestion at that queue.  This CE codepoint travels forward
   through the network to the receiver which then informs the sender
   that it has seen congestion.  The sender is then required to respond
   as if it had experienced a packet loss.  Because the CE codepoint is
   visible in the IP layer, this approach reveals the upstream
   congestion level for a packet.

   The choice of two ECT code-points in the ECN field [RFC3168]
   permitted future flexibility, optionally allowing the sender to
   encode the experimental ECN nonce [RFC3540] in the packet stream.
   This mechanism has since been included in the specifications of DCCP
   [RFC4340].  The ECN nonce is an elegant scheme that allows the sender
   to detect if someone in the feedback loop - the receiver especially -
   tries to claim no congestion was experienced when in fact congestion
   led to packet drops or ECN marks.  For each packet it sends, the
   sender chooses between the two ECT codepoints in a pseudo-random
   sequence.  Then, whenever the network marks a packet with CE, if the



Moncaster, et al.        Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem          October 2009


   receiver wants to deny congestion happened, she has to guess which
   ECT codepoint was overwritten.  She has only a 50:50 chance of being
   correct each time she denies a congestion mark or a drop, which
   ultimately will give her away.

   So Is ECN the Solution?  Alas not - ECN does allow downstream nodes
   to measure the upstream congestion for any flow, but this is not
   enough.  What is needed is knowledge of the downstream congestion
   level for which you need additional information that is still
   concealed from the network by design.

3.  Existing Approaches to Traffic Control

   Existing approaches intended to address the problems outlined above
   can be broadly divided into two groups - those that passively monitor
   traffic and can thus measure the apparent impact of a given flow of
   packets and those that can actively discriminate against certain
   packets, flows, applications or users based on various
   characteristics or metrics.

3.1.  Passive Measurement

   Passive measurement of traffic relies on using the information that
   can be measured directly or is revealed in the IP header of the
   packet.  Architecturally, passive measurement is best since it fits
   with the idea of the hourglass design of the Internet [RFC3439].
   This asserts that "the complexity of the Internet belongs at the
   edges, and the IP layer of the Internet should remain as simple as
   possible."

3.1.1.  Volume Accounting

   Volume accounting is a passive technique that is often used to
   discriminate between users.  The volume of traffic sent by a given
   user or network is one of the easiest pieces of information to
   monitor in a network.  Measuring the size of every packet and adding
   them up is a simple operation and to make it even easier, every IP
   packet carries its overall size in the header.  Consequently this has
   long been a favoured measure used by operators to control their
   customers.

   The precise manner in which this volume information is used may vary.
   Typically ISPs may impose an overall volume cap on their customers
   (perhaps 10Gbytes a month).  Alternatively they may decide that only
   a minority of heavy users are affected in some fashion.






Moncaster, et al.        Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem          October 2009


3.1.2.  Rate Measurement

   Traffic rates are often used as the basis of accounting at borders
   between ISPs.  For instance a contract might specify a charge based
   on the 95th percentile of the peak rate of traffic crossing the
   border every month.  Such bulk rate measurements are relatively easy
   to make.  With a little extra effort it is possible to measure the
   rate of a given flow by using the 3-tuple of source and destination
   IP address and protocol number.

3.2.  Active Discrimination

   [RFC5290] seeks to reinforce [RFC3439] by stating that
   "...differential treatment of traffic can clearly be useful..." but
   adding that such techniques are only useful "...as *adjuncts* to
   simple best-effort traffic, not as *replacements* of simple best-
   effort traffic."  We fully agree with the authors that the network
   should be built on the concept of simple best effort traffic.
   However, as this section shows, a number of approaches have emerged
   over recent years that explicitly differentiate between different
   traffic types, applications and even users.

3.2.1.  Bottleneck Rate Policing

   Bottleneck rate policers such as [XCHOKe] and [pBox] have been
   proposed as approaches for rate policing traffic.  But they must be
   deployed at bottlenecks in order to work.  Unfortunately, a large
   proportion of traffic traverses at least two bottlenecks which limits
   the utility of this approach.  Such rate policers also make an
   assumption about what constitutes acceptable behaviour.  If these
   bottleneck policers were widely deployed, the Internet would find
   itself with one universal rate adaptation policy embedded throughout
   the network.  With TCP's congestion control algorithm approaching its
   scalability limits as the network bandwidth continues to increase,
   new algorithms are being developed for high-speed congestion control.
   Embedding assumptions about acceptable rate adaptation would make
   evolution to such new algorithms extremely painful.

3.2.2.  DPI and Application Rate Policing

   Some operators use deep packet inspection (DPI) and traffic analysis
   to identify certain applications believed to have an excessive impact
   on the network.  These so-called heavy applications are generally
   things like peer-to-peer or streaming video.  Having identified a
   flow as belonging to a heavy application, the operator is able to use
   standard Diffserv [RFC2475] approaches such as policing and traffic
   shaping to limit the throughput given to that flow.  This has fuelled
   the on-going battle between application developers and DPI vendors.



Moncaster, et al.        Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem          October 2009


   When operators first started to limit the throughput of P2P, it soon
   became common knowledge that turning on encryption could boost your
   throughput.  The DPI vendors then improved their equipment so that it
   could identify P2P traffic by the pattern of packets it sends.  This
   risks becoming an endless vicious cycle - an arms race that neither
   side can win.  Furthermore such techniques may put the operator in
   direct conflict with the customers, regulators and content providers.

4.  Why Now?

   Congestion has long been the key metric for deciding how fast a flow
   can safely send traffic.  Since the late 1990s it has also been
   recognised as a key metric for measuring the impact of traffic across
   the network [Kelly].  The IETF is keen to encourage techniques that
   reduce congestion.  For instance the [LEDBAT] working group focuses
   on broadly applicable techniques that allow large amounts of data to
   be transmitted without substantially affecting the delays experienced
   by other users and applications, thus reducing the congestion that
   traffic is causing.

   But users will only want to take advantage of such techniques if they
   actually improve their performance.  As long as ISPs continue to use
   rate and volume as the key metrics for determining when to control
   traffic there is no incentive to use LEDBAT or other protocols that
   reduce congestion.  We believe that congestion exposure gives ISPs
   the information they need to be able to discriminate in favour of
   such low-congestion transports.

5.  Requirements for a Solution

   This section lists the main requirements for any solution to this
   problem.  We believe that a solution that meets most of these
   requirements is likely to be better than one that doesn't.

   o  Allow both upstream and downstream congestion to be visible at the
      IP layer -- visibility at the IP layer allows congestion to be
      monitored in the heart of the network without deploying
      complicated and intrusive equipment such as DPI boxes.  This gives
      several advantages:

      1.  It enables policing of flows based on the congestion they are
          actually going to cause in the network.

      2.  It allows the flow of congestion across ISP borders to be
          monitored.

      3.  It supports a diversity of intra-domain and inter-domain
          congestion management practices.



Moncaster, et al.        Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem          October 2009


   o  Support the widest possible range of transport protocols for the
      widest range of data types (elastic, inelastic, real-time,
      background, etc) -- don't force a "universal rate adaptable
      policy" such as TCP-friendliness [RFC3448].

   o  Be responsive to real-time congestion in the network.

   o  Avoid making assumptions about the behavior of specific
      applications (e.g. be application agnostic).

   o  Allow incremental deployment of the solution and ideally permit
      permanent partial deployment to increase chances of successful
      deployment.

   o  Support integrity of congestion notifications, thus making it hard
      for a user or network to distort the congestion signal.

   o  Be robust in the face of DoS attacks aimed at either congestion
      exposure itself, or at the network elements implementing
      congestion exposure.

   Many of these requirements are by no means unique to the problem of
   congestion exposure.  Incremental deployment for instance is a
   critical requirement for any new protocol that affects something as
   fundamental as IP.  Being robust under attack is also a pre-requisite
   for any protocol to succeed in the real Internet and this is covered
   in more detail in Section 9.

6.  A Strawman Congestion Exposure Protocol

   In this section we are going to explore a simple strawman protocol
   that would solve the congestion exposure problem.  This protocol
   neatly illustrates how a solution might work.  A practical
   implementation of this protocol has been produced and both
   simulations and real-life testing show that it works.  The protocol
   is based on a concept known as re-feedback [Re-fb] and assumes that
   routers can measure their congestion level precisely.

   Re-feedback, standing for re-inserted feedback, is a system designed
   to allow end-hosts to reveal to the network information they have
   received via conventional feedback (for instance RTT or congestion
   level).

   In our strawman protocol we imagine that packets have two
   "congestion" fields in their IP header.  One field records the
   upstream congestion level and routers indicate their current
   congestion level by changing this field in every packet.  So as the
   packet traverses the network it builds up a record of the overall



Moncaster, et al.        Expires April 18, 2010                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem          October 2009


   congestion along its path in this field.  This data is then sent back
   to the sender who uses it to determine its transmission rate.  Using
   re-feedback the sender now inserts this congestion value in the
   second whole path congestion field on every packet it sends out.
   Thus at any node downstream of the sender you can see the upstream
   congestion for the packet (the congestion thus far), the whole path
   congestion (with a time lag of 1RTT) and can calculate the downstream
   congestion by subtracting one from the other.

   So congestion exposure can be achieved by coupling congestion
   notification from routers with the re-insertion of this information
   by the sender.  This establishes an information symmetry between
   users and network providers which opens the door for the evolution of
   new congestion responses which are not bounded to a "universal rate
   adaptation policy".

7.  Use Cases

   Once downstream congestion information is revealed in the IP header
   it can be used for a number of purposes.  Precise details of how the
   information might be used are beyond the scope of this document but
   this section will give an overview of some possible uses.

   It allows an ISP to accurately identify which traffic is having the
   greatest impact on the network and eitehr police directly on that
   basis or use it to determine which users should be policed.  It can
   form the basis of inter-domain contracts between operators.  It could
   even be used as the basis for inter-domain routing, thus encouraging
   operators to invest appropriately in improving their infrastructure.

   From Rich Woundy: "I would add a section about use cases.  The
   primary use case would seem to be an "incentive environment that
   ensures optimal sharing of capacity", although that could use a
   better title.  Other use cases may include "DDoS mitigation", "end-
   to-end QoS", "traffic engineering", and "inter-provider service
   monitoring".  (You can see I am stealing liberally from the
   motivation draft here.  We'll have to see whether the other use cases
   are "core" to this group, or "freebies" that come along with re-ECN
   as a particular protocol.)"

   My take on this is we need to concentrate on one or two major use
   cases.  The most obvious one is using this to control user-behaviour
   and encourage the use of "congestion friendly" protocols such as
   LEDBAT. {Comments from Louise Krug} simply say that operators MUST
   turn off any kind of rate limitation for ledbat traffic and what they
   might mean for the amount of bandwidth they see compared to a
   throttled customer?  YOu could then extend that to say how it leads
   to better QoS differentiation under the assumption that there is a



Moncaster, et al.        Expires April 18, 2010                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem          October 2009


   broad traffic mix any way?  Not sure how much detail you want to go
   into here though?

8.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request to IANA.

9.  Security Considerations

   This section needs to briefly cover the obvious security aspects of
   any congestion exposure scheme: Source address spoofing, DoS,
   integrity of signals, honesty.  It might also be the place to mention
   the possible reluctance to reveal too much information to the whole
   network (some ISPs view congestion level as a commerically sensitive
   concept).  It needs to concentrate on two things in particular: DoS
   attacks that seek to corrupt the congestion information and how to
   ensure the honest declaration of information (both by the network and
   by the end-user).

10.  Conclusions

   Congestion exposure is the idea that traffic itself indicates to all
   nodes on its path how much congestion it causes on the entire path.
   It is useful for network operators to police flows only if they
   really cause congestion in the Internet instead of doing blind rate
   capping independently of the congestion situation.  This change would
   give incentives to users to adopt new transport protocols such as
   LEDBAT which try to avoid congestion more than TCP does.
   Requirements for congestion exposure in the IP header were
   summarized, one technical solution was presented, and additional use
   cases for congestion exposure were discussed.

11.  Acknowledgements

   A number of people have provided text and comments for this memo.
   The document is being produced in support of a BoF on Congestion
   Exposure as discussed extensively on the <re-ecn@ietf.org> mailing
   list.

12.  Informative References

   [CC-open-research]  Welzl, M., Scharf, M., Briscoe, B., and D.
                       Papadimitriou, "Open Research Issues in Internet
                       Congestion Control", draft-irtf-iccrg-welzl-
                       congestion-control-open-research-05 (work in
                       progress), September 2009.

   [Cisco-VNI]         Cisco Systems, inc., "Cisco Visual Networking



Moncaster, et al.        Expires April 18, 2010                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem          October 2009


                       Index: Forecast and Methodology, 2008-2013",
                       June 2009.

   [Fairness]          Briscoe, B., Moncaster, T., and A. Burness,
                       "Problem Statement: Transport Protocols Don't
                       Have To Do Fairness",
                       draft-briscoe-tsvwg-relax-fairness-01 (work in
                       progress), July 2008.

   [Kelly]             Kelly, F., Maulloo, A., and D. Tan, "Rate control
                       for communication networks: shadow prices,
                       proportional fairness and stability", Journal of
                       the Operational Research Society 49(3) 237--252,
                       1998,
                       <http://www.statslab.cam.ac.uk/~frank/rate.html>.

   [LEDBAT]            Shalunov, S., "Low Extra Delay Background
                       Transport (LEDBAT)",
                       draft-shalunov-ledbat-congestion-00 (work in
                       progress), March 2009.

   [OfCom]             Ofcom: Office of Communications, "UK Broadband
                       Speeds 2008: Research report", January 2009.

   [RFC2309]           Braden, B., Clark, D., Crowcroft, J., Davie, B.,
                       Deering, S., Estrin, D., Floyd, S., Jacobson, V.,
                       Minshall, G., Partridge, C., Peterson, L.,
                       Ramakrishnan, K., Shenker, S., Wroclawski, J.,
                       and L. Zhang, "Recommendations on Queue
                       Management and Congestion Avoidance in the
                       Internet", RFC 2309, April 1998.

   [RFC2475]           Blake, S., Black, D., Carlson, M., Davies, E.,
                       Wang, Z., and W. Weiss, "An Architecture for
                       Differentiated Services", RFC 2475,
                       December 1998.

   [RFC3168]           Ramakrishnan, K., Floyd, S., and D. Black, "The
                       Addition of Explicit Congestion Notification
                       (ECN) to IP", RFC 3168, September 2001.

   [RFC3439]           Bush, R. and D. Meyer, "Some Internet
                       Architectural Guidelines and Philosophy",
                       RFC 3439, December 2002.

   [RFC3448]           Handley, M., Floyd, S., Padhye, J., and J.
                       Widmer, "TCP Friendly Rate Control (TFRC):
                       Protocol Specification", RFC 3448, January 2003.



Moncaster, et al.        Expires April 18, 2010                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem          October 2009


   [RFC3540]           Spring, N., Wetherall, D., and D. Ely, "Robust
                       Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) Signaling
                       with Nonces", RFC 3540, June 2003.

   [RFC4340]           Kohler, E., Handley, M., and S. Floyd, "Datagram
                       Congestion Control Protocol (DCCP)", RFC 4340,
                       March 2006.

   [RFC5290]           Floyd, S. and M. Allman, "Comments on the
                       Usefulness of Simple Best-Effort Traffic",
                       RFC 5290, July 2008.

   [RFC5594]           Peterson, J. and A. Cooper, "Report from the IETF
                       Workshop on Peer-to-Peer (P2P) Infrastructure,
                       May 28, 2008", RFC 5594, July 2009.

   [Re-fb]             Briscoe, B., Jacquet, A., Di Cairano-Gilfedder,
                       C., Salvatori, A., Soppera, A., and M. Koyabe,
                       "Policing Congestion Response in an Internetwork
                       Using Re-Feedback", ACM SIGCOMM CCR 35(4)277--
                       288, August 2005, <http://www.acm.org/sigs/
                       sigcomm/sigcomm2005/techprog.html#session8>.

   [XCHOKe]            Chhabra, P., Chuig, S., Goel, A., John, A.,
                       Kumar, A., Saran, H., and R. Shorey, "XCHOKe:
                       Malicious Source Control for Congestion Avoidance
                       at Internet Gateways", Proceedings of IEEE
                       International Conference on Network Protocols
                       (ICNP-02) , November 2002,
                       <http://www.cc.gatech.edu/~akumar/xchoke.pdf>.

   [pBox]              Floyd, S. and K. Fall, "Promoting the Use of End-
                       to-End Congestion Control in the Internet", IEEE/
                       ACM Transactions on Networking 7(4) 458--472,
                       August 1999,
                       <http://www.aciri.org/floyd/end2end-paper.html>.















Moncaster, et al.        Expires April 18, 2010                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem          October 2009


Authors' Addresses

   Toby Moncaster (editor)
   BT
   B54/70, Adastral Park
   Martlesham Heath
   Ipswich  IP5 3RE
   UK

   Phone: +44 7918 901170
   EMail: toby.moncaster@bt.com


   Louise Krug
   BT
   B54/77, Adastral Park
   Martlesham Heath
   Ipswich  IP5 3RE
   UK

   EMail: louise.burness@bt.com


   Michael Menth
   University of Wuerzburg
   room B206, Institute of Computer Science
   Am Hubland
   Wuerzburg  D-97074
   Germany

   Phone: +49 931 888 6644
   EMail: menth@informatik.uni-wuerzburg.de


   Joao Taveira Araujo
   UCL
   GS206 Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering
   Torrington Place
   London  WC1E 7JE
   UK

   EMail: j.araujo@ee.ucl.ac.uk









Moncaster, et al.        Expires April 18, 2010                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem          October 2009


   Steven Blake
   Extreme Networks
   Pamlico Building One, Suite 100
   3306/08 E. NC Hwy 54
   RTP, NC 27709
   US

   EMail: sblake@extremenetworks.com


   Richard Woundy
   Comcast
   Comcast Cable Communications
   27 Industrial Avenue
   Chelmsford, MA  01824
   US

   EMail: richard_woundy@cable.comcast.com
   URI:   http://www.comcast.com
































Moncaster, et al.        Expires April 18, 2010                [Page 15]


