


Congestion Exposure                                    T. Moncaster, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                                L. Burness
Intended status: Informational                                        BT
Expires: April 3, 2010                                          M. Menth
                                                 University of Wuerzburg
                                                               J. Araujo
                                                                     UCL
                                                                S. Blake
                                                        Extreme Networks
                                                               R. Woundy
                                                                 Comcast
                                                      September 30, 2009


            The Nede for Congestion Exposure in the Internet
             draft-moncaster-congestion-exposure-problem-00

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 3, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).



Moncaster, et al.         Expires April 3, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem        September 2009


   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   Over the past decades, TCP's congestion control algorithm has allowed
   the Internet to grow enormously whilst saving it from congestion
   collapse.  However, TCP is applied on a voluntary base with bandwidth
   shared among flows instead of users.  This causes problems,
   especially at peak times when the network becomes saturated, and this
   leads some ISPs to police traffic to alleviate congestion.  However,
   since congestion on the downstream path of a flow is not visible,
   these approaches are blind to the true impact of the traffic being
   policed and are not effective enough.

   We propose congestion exposure as a possible solution.  This means
   that a flow reveals an estimate of the congestion it causes on its
   remaining downstream path.  Congestion exposure gives many benfits
   including meaningful policing at network ingresses, congestion-based
   accounting between ISPs, fairer bandwidth sharing among users,
   increased trust in the congestion-responsiveness of end-systems, and
   possibly congestion-dependent load balancing and routing.  In short
   congestion exposure leads to a more efficient and fairer Internet.
   This document motivates the need for congestion exposure and
   illustrates its usefulness in different use cases.  Therefore,
   actions should be taken to implement a simple form of congestion
   exposure in the Internet.
























Moncaster, et al.         Expires April 3, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem        September 2009


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   2.  The Problem  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
   3.  Why Now? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   4.  Solutions That Exacerbate the Problem  . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.1.  Passive Measurement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       4.1.1.  Volume Accounting  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       4.1.2.  Rate Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     4.2.  Active Discrimination  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
       4.2.1.  Bottleneck Rate Policing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
       4.2.2.  DPI and Application Rate Policing  . . . . . . . . . .  8
   5.  Towards a Proper Solution  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.1.  The Impact of Congestion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
     5.2.  Requirements for a Solution  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     5.3.  Explicit Congestion Notification . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
       5.3.1.  So Is ECN the Solution?  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   6.  A Strawman Congestion Exposure Protocol  . . . . . . . . . . . 12
   7.  Use Cases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   9.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
   10. Conclusions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   11. Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
   12. References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     12.1. Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
     12.2. Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14

























Moncaster, et al.         Expires April 3, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem        September 2009


1.  Introduction

   One of the strengths of the Internet is its ability to share capacity
   and avoid congestion collapse through the use of distributed
   algorithms such as TCP running on its end-hosts.  Although the
   resulting capacity allocation appears fair, it is not well-suited to
   the conflicting needs of the many different stakeholders in the
   commercial Internet.

   Worse, it only needs a small number of end-hosts "gaming the system"
   to cause enough congestion to severely limit the user-experience of
   many other end-hosts.  Faced with this problem, some ISPs are seeking
   to reduce what they regard as "heavy usage" regardless of the
   underlying congestion situation, thereby eroding the trust which the
   original Internet design assumed.

   ISPs have a variety of measures available to them to skew access to
   capacity amongst their users, ranging from the complex (per-user fair
   queuing, volume-based billing) to the crude (per-application
   prioritization or rate capping).  A problem with such mechanisms is
   that they control the wrong quantity: it is neither the volume nor
   rate of traffic that causes a problem to other users; rather, it is
   the congestion that traffic causes that is the real problem.

   Current work at the IETF [LEDBAT] & [ALTO] and IRTF
   [CC-open-research] is looking at new approaches for controlling bulk
   data transfer rates.  But ISPs have no means for enforcing their use
   and indeed may even be hindering their deployment through their crude
   attempts at traffic control which take no account of the congestion
   attributable to a given application.  The ISPs still have an
   incentive to deploy the flawed tools at their disposal in an attempt
   to manage capacity and reduce congestion.  Using such mechanisms that
   monitor the wrong information embeds assumptions about desirable
   behaviour into the core of the network.  This stifles innovation and
   leads to stagnation of the network.  What ISPs lack is a way to
   measure or even see the congestion caused by a user's traffic on an
   end-to-end basis.  Such a measure could be used to build trust
   between operators and end-users and between different tiers of
   operators ths leading to cooperative behaviour.  In short the
   Internet lacks a system for accountability.

   Currently, congestion information is visible only at end-hosts, and
   is concealed from the rest of the network.  We propose that this
   information should be made visible at the IP layer.  Once congestion
   information is exposed in this way, it is then possible to use it to
   measure the true impact of any traffic on the network.  This means
   operators will now be able to measure the congestion attributable to
   a given application or user and will thus be able to incentivise the



Moncaster, et al.         Expires April 3, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem        September 2009


   use of protocols such as [LEDBAT] which aim to reduce the congestion
   caused by bulk data transfers.

   The rest of this document is organised as follows.  Section 2 looks
   in detail at the problem of resource sharing in the Internet.
   Section 3 looks briefly at some of the techniques related to the
   control of resource sharing and shows how these are inadequate.
   Section 4 gives some requirements that we believe need to be met by
   any solution.  Section 5 looks at a possible solution that reveals
   downstream congestion at the IP layer of each packet, where it is
   visible to every node that forwards that packet.  Section 6 explores
   some use cases where we think a solution can be usefully deployed.
   Section 7 considers the question of "Why Now?" - what has changed in
   the Internet that now makes this a critical problem to solve.

2.  The Problem

   The Internet owes its success to its ability to share capacity among
   billions of hosts through the use of distributed algorithms such as
   TCP running on its end-hosts.  This has allowed the network to expand
   from a few tens of hosts connected at kbps to millions of hosts
   connected at Gbps.  TCP has undoubtedly been the hero of this piece,
   but its limitations are beginning to show [Fairness].  TCP is very
   good at sharing bottlenecks equally between flows, so-called TCP-
   fairness, but it fails to take proper account of how many flows an
   end-host may have or how long they have persisted since historically,
   such parameters only varied over small ranges.  The resulting
   capacity allocation is fair in one narrow sense, but it is unable to
   provide for the conflicting needs of all the stakeholders in today's
   commercial Internet.

   The problem is that the Internet has changed over recent years.  It
   has gone from being a place of cooperation between scientific
   researchers, to a battleground between rival commercial and
   sociological interests.  In this environment an end-host that manages
   to take advantage of the system can rapidly cause sufficient
   congestion to impact the user-experience of many other end-hosts.
   TCP will still ensure there is no congestion collapse but that is of
   scant comfort to those users seeing their connection starved by
   overly agressive competition for bandwidth.

   At the same time, application writers and content providers are
   involved in a battle to win the most consumers.  Naturally they are
   happy to explore the full range of behaviour of TCP in an effort to
   seize a competitive advantage.  Some of them choose to use other
   transports and congestion response algorithms that are better suited
   to inelastic traffic.  The IETF has even recognised this need and
   proposed TCP-Friendly Rate Control [RFC3448] as a possible solution.



Moncaster, et al.         Expires April 3, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem        September 2009


   ISPs are placed in a quandary - they know that any increases in
   capacity will be of most benefit to the most aggressive users.  At
   the same time, increasing competition is squeezing their profit
   margins and driving the Internet towards commoditisation.  Faced with
   these problems, some ISPs are seeking to reduce what they regard as
   "heavy usage" in order to improve the service experienced by the
   majority of their customers.  Unfortunately they are only able to see
   limited information aboutu the traffic they forward.  Thus they are
   forced to use the only information they do have available which leads
   to myopic control that has scant regard for the actual impact of the
   traffic or the underlying network conditions.  This sets these ISPs
   on a direct collision course with consumer rights groups and even
   regulators.

3.  Why Now?

   LEDBAT is a transport-area WG that will focus on broadly applicable
   techniques that allow large amounts of data to be consistently
   transmitted without substantially affecting the delays experienced by
   other users and applications.  In doing so it tries to ensure that a
   range of applications can co-exist on the internet.

   The solutions seem to be based round providing a background or low-
   congestion transport of some form.  The issue is that these efforts
   will only solve part of the problem.  Whilst users will now have an
   option to put their bulk traffic into a background activity, enabling
   interactive traffic to go faster, this only solves the general
   problem if everyone does it.  It is not enough to stop operators from
   doing volume capping as well (...because the operator can not prove
   for themselves that the stuff is running in a careful background
   mode?)  Thus, for as long as some users continue to use aggressive
   TCP rather than background transport, other users will still see a
   lack of bandwidth, and to overcome that, operators will throttle all
   traffic.

   The information that distinguishes background traffic from TCP is how
   the traffic responds to congestion.  If a network could see the
   congestion as well as the data rate of a flow, it could safely
   determine which traffic was aggressive TCP and which traffic was non-
   aggressive because they could see which traffic was responding
   strongly to the congestion signals.  If the traffic is responding
   strongly to such signals and moving itself out of the way of
   interactive traffic there is no need to cap it.

   We need to show that congestion exposure gives ISPs the information
   they need to be able to discriminate in favour of such low-congestion
   transports...




Moncaster, et al.         Expires April 3, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem        September 2009


4.  Solutions That Exacerbate the Problem

   Existing approaches intended to address the problems outlined above
   can be broadly divided into two groups - those that passively monitor
   traffic and can thus measure the apparent impact of a given flow of
   packets and those that can actively discriminate against certain
   packets, flows, applications or users based on various
   characteristics or metrics.

4.1.  Passive Measurement

   Passive measurement of traffic relies on using the information that
   can be measured directly or is revealed in the IP header of the
   packet.  Architecurally, passive measurement is cleaner since it
   better fits with the idea of the hourglass design of the Internet
   [RFC3439].  This asserts that "the complexity of the Internet belongs
   at the edges, and the IP layer of the Internet should remain as
   simple as possible."

4.1.1.  Volume Accounting

   Volume accounting is a passive technique that is often used to
   discriminate between users.  The volume of traffic sent by a given
   user or network is one of the easiest pieces of information to
   monitor in a network.  Measuring the size of every packet and adding
   them up is a simple operation and to make it even easier, every IP
   packet carries its overall size in the header.  Consequently this has
   long been a favoured measure used by operators to control their
   customers.  Many broadband contracts include volume limits either
   explicitly (e.g. you can transfer 10Gb per month) or implicitly in
   the fair use policy (e.g. you are allowed to transfer as much as you
   like but exceptionally heavy users will be penalised in some
   fashion).

4.1.2.  Rate Measurement

   Traffic rates are often used as the basis of accounting at borders
   between ISPs.  For instance a contract might specify a charge based
   on the 95th centile of the peak rate of traffic crossing the border
   every month.  Such bulk rate measurements are relatively easy to
   make.  With a little extra effort it is possible to measure the rate
   of a given flow by using the 3-tuple of source and destination IP
   address and protocol number.

4.2.  Active Discrimination

   [RFC5290] seeks to reinforce [RFC3439] by stating that
   "...differential treatment of traffic can clearly be useful..." but



Moncaster, et al.         Expires April 3, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem        September 2009


   adding that such techniques are only useful "...as *adjuncts* to
   simple best-effort traffic, not as *replacements* of simple best-
   effort traffic."  We fully agree with the authors that the network
   should be built on the concept of simple best effort traffic.
   However, as this section shows, a number of approaches have emerged
   over recent years that explicitly differentiate between different
   traffic types, applications and even users.

4.2.1.  Bottleneck Rate Policing

   Bottleneck rate policers such as [XCHOKe] and [pBox] have been
   proposed as approaches for rate policing traffic without the benefit
   of whole path information.  But they must be deployed at bottlenecks
   in order to work.  Unfortunately, a large proportion of traffic
   traverses at least two bottlenecks (in two access networks),
   particularly with the current traffic mix where peer-to-peer file-
   sharing is prevalent.  If these bottleneck policers were widely
   deployed, the Internet would find itself with one universal rate
   adaptation policy embedded throughout the network.  Given TCP's
   congestion control algorithm is approaching its scalability limits
   and new algorithms are being developed for high- speed congestion
   control, embedding TCP policing into the Internet would make
   evolution to new algorithms extremely painful.  If a source wanted to
   use a different algorithm, it would have to first discover then
   negotiate with all the policers on its path, particularly those in
   the far access network.  The IETF has already traveled that path with
   the Intserv architecture and found it constrains scalability
   [RFC2208].

4.2.2.  DPI and Application Rate Policing

   Some operators use deep packet inspection (DPI) and traffic analysis
   to identify certain applications beleived to have an excessive impact
   on the network.  These so-called heavy applications are generally
   things like peer-to-peer or streaming video.  Having identified a
   flow as belinging to a heavy application, the operator is able to use
   standard Diffserv [RFC2475] approaches such as policing and traffic
   shaping to limit the throuhgput given to that flow.  This has fuelled
   the on-going battle between application developers and DPI vendors.
   When operators first started to limit the throughput of P2P, it soon
   became common knowledge that turning on encryption could boost your
   throughput.  The DPI vendors then imporved their equipment so that it
   could identify P2P traffic by the pattern of packets it sends.  This
   risks becoming an endless cycle - an arms race that neither side can
   win.  Furthermore such techniques may put the operator in direct
   conflict with the customers, regulators and content providers.





Moncaster, et al.         Expires April 3, 2010                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem        September 2009


5.  Towards a Proper Solution

   To understand why current attempts at solving the problem are
   inadequate we have to better understand what is really happening in
   the network.  The key thing is to realise that, in an increasingly
   commercial world, networks are subject to the laws of economics and
   so economics can provide some of the answers.

5.1.  The Impact of Congestion

   As the Internet has grown the impact of congestion has tended to
   reduce as access rates trail those in the core.  However over recent
   years this has started to change.  Increasingly large numbers of
   people now access the network via broadband connections and the speed
   they can get is steadily increasing.  Alongside this have gone
   significant changes in traffic patterns.  We have been through a boom
   in large-scale data transfer by peer to peer networks and now are
   seeing an even larger boom in streaming media with applications such
   as the BBC iPlayer becoming increasingly popular.  The main effect of
   this has been that users now routinely see their network connections
   running slow in the evenings [http://community.plus.net/blog/2008/07/
   17/more-record-breaking-streaming-and-the-latest-iplayer-news/].

   The response of many operators has been to use tecnhniques such as
   volume caps or application rate limiting to try and squeeze out the
   traffic associated with these applications and thus hopefuly improve
   the quality of experience for the majority of their customers.
   However the problem is they are unable to see the true impact each
   customer is actually causing on other customers.  By design,
   congestion is concealed from all but the end-hosts in the network.
   Most network economists accept that congestion represents the shadow
   price of network usage [Kelly].  This is actually quite an easy
   concept to understand - if a network link is empty then it doesn't
   matter how fast you send traffic through it, you will never have an
   impact on anyone else.  But if that same link is at full capacity
   then any extra traffic entering the link will have a significant
   impact on everyone sharing the link.  In economic terms, this impact
   is known as a negative externality and the classic solution is to
   convert it to a shadow price that is used to determine the marginal
   cost of using the network.

   This means congestion is the only fair metric to use to differentiate
   between the behaviour of different users.  The IETF is already aware
   of this, hence such efforts as LEDBAT [LEDBAT] which seeks to
   minimise the congestion caused by bulk data transfers in order to
   free up the network for more urgent data.  However this has no
   benefit to the user if the operator is unable to see that they are
   behaving in an altruistic manner.  The operator is still only able to



Moncaster, et al.         Expires April 3, 2010                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem        September 2009


   use the information that is visible to control the traffic.  We
   believe the obvious solution to this is to reveal congestion in the
   netowrk itself.

5.2.  Requirements for a Solution

   Before we look at requirements it is important to define two terms:

      Upstream congestion is defined as the congestion that has already
      been experienced by a packet as it travels along its path.  In
      other words it is the congestion between the current point and the
      source of the packet.

      Downstream congestion is defined as the congestion that a packet
      still has to experience on the remainder of its path.  In other
      words it is the congestion between the current point and the
      destination of the packet.

   This section lists the main requirements for any solution to this
   problem.  Not every requirement is equally important and they are not
   listed in any particular order.  However we believe that a solution
   that meets most or all these requirements is likely to be better than
   one that doesn't.

   o  Allow both upstream and downstream congestion to be visible at the
      IP layer -- visibility at the IP layer allows congestion to be
      monitored in the heart of the network without deploying
      complicated and intrusive equipment such as DPI boxes.  This gives
      several advantages:

      1.  It enables policing of flows based on the congestion they are
          actually going to cause in the network.

      2.  It allows the flow of congestion across ISP borders to be
          monitored.

      3.  It supports a diversity of intra-domain and inter-domain
          congestion management practices.

   o  Support the widest possible range of transport protocols for the
      widest range of data types (elastic, inelastic, real-time,
      background, etc) -- don't force a "universal rate adaptable
      policy" such as TCP-friendliness [RFC3448].

   o  Be responsive to real-time congestion in the network.

   o  Avoid making assumptions about the behavior of specific
      applications (e.g. be application agnostic).



Moncaster, et al.         Expires April 3, 2010                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem        September 2009


   o  Allow incremental deployment of the solution and ideally permit
      permanent partial deployment to increase chances of successful
      deployment.

   o  Support integrity of congestion notifications; that is, make it
      difficult to generate false positives and false negatives in
      congestion notifications.

   o  Be robust in the face of DoS attacks aimed at either congestion
      exposure itself, or at the network elements implementing
      congestion exposure.

   Many of these requirements are by no means unique to the problem of
   congestion exposure.  Incremental deployment for instance is a
   critical requirement for any new protocol that affects something as
   fundamental as IP.  Being robust under attack is also a pre-requisite
   for any protocol to succeed in the real Internet and this is covered
   in more detail in Section 9.

5.3.  Explicit Congestion Notification

   Explicit Congestion Notification [RFC3168] allows routers to
   explicitly tell end-hosts that they are approaching the point of
   congestion.  ECN builds on Active Queue Mechanisms such as random
   early discard (RED) [RFC2309] by allowing the router to mark a packet
   with a Congestion Experienced (CE) codeopoint, rather than dropping
   it.  The probability of a packet being marked increases with the
   length of the queue and thus the rate of CE marks is a guide to the
   level of congestion at that queue.  This CE codepoint travels forward
   through the network to the receiver which then informs the sender
   that it has seen congestion.  The sender is then required to respond
   as if it had experienced a packet loss.  Because the CE codepoint is
   visible in the IP layer, this approach reveals the upstream
   congestion level for a packet.

   The choice of two ECT code-points in the ECN field [RFC3168]
   permitted future flexibility, optionally allowing the sender to
   encode the experimental ECN nonce [RFC3540] in the packet stream.
   This mechanism has since been included in the specifications of DCCP
   [RFC4340].  The ECN nonce is an elegant scheme that allows the sender
   to detect if someone in the feedback loop - the receiver especially -
   tries to claim no congestion was experienced when in fact congestion
   led to packet drops or ECN marks.  For each packet it sends, the
   sender chooses between the two ECT codepoints in a pseudo-random
   sequence.  Then, whenever the network marks a packet with CE, if the
   receiver wants to deny congestion happened, she has to guess which
   ECT codepoint was overwritten.  She has only a 50:50 chance of being
   correct each time she denies a congestion mark or a drop, which



Moncaster, et al.         Expires April 3, 2010                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem        September 2009


   ultimately will give her away.

5.3.1.  So Is ECN the Solution?

   In a word, no.  ECN does allow dowsntream nodes to measure the
   upstream congestion for any flow, but this is not enough to allow
   fairer control of traffic.  That can only come with knowledge of the
   downstream congestion level for which you need additional information
   that is still concealed from the network by design.  Some approaches
   {can't remember for certain, but might be PURPLE} use ECN information
   to try and select which flows are suitable to be dropped at a
   bottleneck, but these are just variations on bottleneck policing
   which was discussed in Section 4.2.1.

6.  A Strawman Congestion Exposure Protocol

   In this section we are going to explore a simple strawman protocol
   that would solve the congestion exposure problem.  This protocol
   neatly illustrates how a solution might work.  A practical
   implementation of this protocol has been produced and both
   simulations and real-life testing show that it works.  The protocol
   is based on a concept known as re-feedback [Re-fb] and assumes that
   routers can meausre their congestion level precisely.

   Re-feedback, standing for re-inserted feedback, is a system designed
   to allow end-hosts to reveal to the network information they have
   received via conventional feedback (for instance RTT or congestion
   level).  In IP information always flows in 1 direction round the
   feedback loop and so nodes upstream are unable to see as much
   information as nodes further downstream.  By using re-feedback to re-
   insert the congestion feedback signaled by the receiver into the
   forward path, we can correct this information asymmetry and close the
   feedback loop.

   In our strawman protocol we imagine that packets have two
   "congestion" fields in their IP header.  One field records the
   upstream congestion level and routers indicate their current
   congestion level by changing this field in every packet.  So as the
   packet traverses the network it builds up a record of the overall
   congestion along its path in this field.  This data is then sent back
   to the sender who uses it to determine its transmission rate.  Using
   re-feedback the sender now inserts this congestion value in the
   second whole path congestion field on every packet it sends out.
   Thus at any node downstream of the sender you can see the upstream
   congestion for the packet (the congestion thus far), the whole path
   congestion (with a time lag of 1RTT) and can calculate the downstream
   congestion by subtracting one from the other.




Moncaster, et al.         Expires April 3, 2010                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem        September 2009


   The downstream congestion information can now be used for a number of
   things.  It allows an ISP to accurately identify which traffic is
   having the greatest impact on the network and eitehr police directly
   on that basis or use it to determine which users should be policed.
   It can form the basis of inter-domain contracts between operators.
   It could even be used as the basis for inter-domain routing, thus
   encouraging operators to invest appropriately in improving their
   infrastructure.

   Summing up, exposing congstion both upstream and downstream can be
   achieved by coupling congestion notification from routers with the
   re-insertion of this informaiton by the sender.  This establishes an
   information symmetry between users and network providers which opens
   the door for the evolution of new congestion responses which are not
   bounded to a "universal rate adaptable policy".

7.  Use Cases

   From Rich Woundy: "I would add a section about use cases.  The
   primary use case would seem to be an "incentive environment that
   ensures optimal sharing of capacity", although that could use a
   better title.  Other use cases may include "DDoS mitigation", "end-
   to-end QoS", "traffic engineering", and "inter-provider service
   monitoring".  (You can see I am stealing liberally from the
   motivation draft here.  We'll have to see whether the other use cases
   are "core" to this group, or "freebies" that come along with re-ECN
   as a particular protocol.)"

   My take on this is we need to concentrate on one or two major use
   cases.  The most obvious one is using this to control user-behaviour
   and encourage the use of "congesiton friendly" protocols such as
   LEDBAT. {Comments from Louise Burness} simply say that operators MUST
   turn off any kind of rate limitation for ledbat traffic and what they
   might mean for the amount of bandwidth they see compared to a
   throttled customer?  YOu could then extend that to say how it leads
   to better QoS differentiation under the assumption that there is a
   broad traffic mix any way?  Not sure how much detail you want to go
   into here though?

8.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request to IANA.

9.  Security Considerations

   This section needs to briefly cover the obvious security aspects of
   any congestion exposure scheme: Source address spoofing, DoS,
   integrity of signals, honesty.  It might also be the place to mention



Moncaster, et al.         Expires April 3, 2010                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem        September 2009


   the possible reluctance to reveal too much information to the whole
   network (some ISPs view congestion level as a commerically sensitive
   concept).

10.  Conclusions

11.  Acknowledgements

   A number of people have provided text and comments for this memo.
   The document is being produced in support of a BoF on Congestion
   Exposure as discussed extensively on the <re-ecn@ietf.org> mailing
   list.

12.  References

12.1.  Normative References

12.2.  Informative References

   [ALTO]              Seedorf, J. and E. Burger, "Application-Layer
                       Traffic Optimization (ALTO) Problem Statement",
                       draft-ietf-alto-problem-statement-04 (work in
                       progress), September 2009.

   [CC-open-research]  Welzl, M., Scharf, M., Briscoe, B., and D.
                       Papadimitriou, "Open Research Issues in Internet
                       Congestion Control", draft-irtf-iccrg-welzl-
                       congestion-control-open-research-05 (work in
                       progress), September 2009.

   [Fairness]          Briscoe, B., Moncaster, T., and A. Burness,
                       "Problem Statement: Transport Protocols Don't
                       Have To Do Fairness",
                       draft-briscoe-tsvwg-relax-fairness-01 (work in
                       progress), July 2008.

   [Kelly]             Kelly, F., Maulloo, A., and D. Tan, "Rate control
                       for communication networks: shadow prices,
                       proportional fairness and stability", Journal of
                       the Operational Research Society 49(3) 237--252,
                       1998,
                       <http://www.statslab.cam.ac.uk/~frank/rate.html>.

   [LEDBAT]            Shalunov, S., "Low Extra Delay Background
                       Transport (LEDBAT)",
                       draft-shalunov-ledbat-congestion-00 (work in
                       progress), March 2009.




Moncaster, et al.         Expires April 3, 2010                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem        September 2009


   [RFC2208]           Mankin, A., Baker, F., Braden, B., Bradner, S.,
                       O'Dell, M., Romanow, A., Weinrib, A., and L.
                       Zhang, "Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP)
                       Version 1 Applicability Statement Some Guidelines
                       on Deployment", RFC 2208, September 1997.

   [RFC2309]           Braden, B., Clark, D., Crowcroft, J., Davie, B.,
                       Deering, S., Estrin, D., Floyd, S., Jacobson, V.,
                       Minshall, G., Partridge, C., Peterson, L.,
                       Ramakrishnan, K., Shenker, S., Wroclawski, J.,
                       and L. Zhang, "Recommendations on Queue
                       Management and Congestion Avoidance in the
                       Internet", RFC 2309, April 1998.

   [RFC2475]           Blake, S., Black, D., Carlson, M., Davies, E.,
                       Wang, Z., and W. Weiss, "An Architecture for
                       Differentiated Services", RFC 2475,
                       December 1998.

   [RFC3168]           Ramakrishnan, K., Floyd, S., and D. Black, "The
                       Addition of Explicit Congestion Notification
                       (ECN) to IP", RFC 3168, September 2001.

   [RFC3439]           Bush, R. and D. Meyer, "Some Internet
                       Architectural Guidelines and Philosophy",
                       RFC 3439, December 2002.

   [RFC3448]           Handley, M., Floyd, S., Padhye, J., and J.
                       Widmer, "TCP Friendly Rate Control (TFRC):
                       Protocol Specification", RFC 3448, January 2003.

   [RFC3540]           Spring, N., Wetherall, D., and D. Ely, "Robust
                       Explicit Congestion Notification (ECN) Signaling
                       with Nonces", RFC 3540, June 2003.

   [RFC4340]           Kohler, E., Handley, M., and S. Floyd, "Datagram
                       Congestion Control Protocol (DCCP)", RFC 4340,
                       March 2006.

   [RFC5290]           Floyd, S. and M. Allman, "Comments on the
                       Usefulness of Simple Best-Effort Traffic",
                       RFC 5290, July 2008.

   [Re-fb]             Briscoe, B., Jacquet, A., Di Cairano-Gilfedder,
                       C., Salvatori, A., Soppera, A., and M. Koyabe,
                       "Policing Congestion Response in an Internetwork
                       Using Re-Feedback", ACM SIGCOMM CCR 35(4)277--
                       288, August 2005, <http://www.acm.org/sigs/



Moncaster, et al.         Expires April 3, 2010                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem        September 2009


                       sigcomm/sigcomm2005/techprog.html#session8>.

   [XCHOKe]            Chhabra, P., Chuig, S., Goel, A., John, A.,
                       Kumar, A., Saran, H., and R. Shorey, "XCHOKe:
                       Malicious Source Control for Congestion Avoidance
                       at Internet Gateways", Proceedings of IEEE
                       International Conference on Network Protocols
                       (ICNP-02) , November 2002,
                       <http://www.cc.gatech.edu/~akumar/xchoke.pdf>.

   [pBox]              Floyd, S. and K. Fall, "Promoting the Use of End-
                       to-End Congestion Control in the Internet", IEEE/
                       ACM Transactions on Networking 7(4) 458--472,
                       August 1999,
                       <http://www.aciri.org/floyd/end2end-paper.html>.

Authors' Addresses

   Toby Moncaster (editor)
   BT
   B54/70, Adastral Park
   Martlesham Heath
   Ipswich  IP5 3RE
   UK

   Phone: +44 7918 901170
   EMail: toby.moncaster@bt.com


   Louise Burness
   BT
   B54/77, Adastral Park
   Martlesham Heath
   Ipswich  IP5 3RE
   UK

   EMail: louise.burness@bt.com














Moncaster, et al.         Expires April 3, 2010                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft         Congestion Exposure Problem        September 2009


   Michael Menth
   University of Wuerzburg
   room B206, Institute of Computer Science
   Am Hubland
   Wuerzburg  D-97074
   Germany

   Phone: +49 931 888 6644
   EMail: menth@informatik.uni-wuerzburg.de


   Joao Taveira Araujo
   UCL


   Steven Blake
   Extreme Networks
   Pamlico Building One, Suite 100
   3306/08 E. NC Hwy 54
   RTP, NC 27709
   US

   EMail: slblake@petri-meat.com


   Richard Woundy
   Comcast
   Comcast Cable Communications
   27 Industrial Avenue
   Chelmsford, MA  01824
   US

   EMail: richard_woundy@cable.comcast.com
   URI:   http://www.comcast.com

















Moncaster, et al.         Expires April 3, 2010                [Page 17]


