

ROLL                                                           Anni. Wei
Internet-Draft                                       Huawei Technologies
Intended status: Informational                            August 7, 2009
Expires: February 8, 2010


          A routing method based on detection frames over LLNs
                       draft-wei-roll-rmdf-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  This document may contain material
   from IETF Documents or IETF Contributions published or made publicly
   available before November 10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the
   copyright in some of this material may not have granted the IETF
   Trust the right to allow modifications of such material outside the
   IETF Standards Process.  Without obtaining an adequate license from
   the person(s) controlling the copyright in such materials, this
   document may not be modified outside the IETF Standards Process, and
   derivative works of it may not be created outside the IETF Standards
   Process, except to format it for publication as an RFC or to
   translate it into languages other than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on February 8, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal



Wei                     Expires February 8, 2010                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft  routing method based on detection frames     August 2009


   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   This document presents a routing method through sending detection
   frames including address of destination node to the neighbor nodes to
   reduce delay of data transmission because of the dormant nodes will
   increase data transmission delay in low power and lossy
   networks(LLNs).  When receives the response from the neighbor nodes,
   the sending node can select a neighboring node as the next hop node
   to sent data, which has the lower cost parameter than the cost
   parameter between the sending node and the destination node stored in
   the routing table of sending node.  This routing method finds a route
   in real-time by broadcasting detection frames.  As long as any
   neighbor node that can reach the destination is active, data can be
   sent and then the data transmission delay will be reduced.
































Wei                     Expires February 8, 2010                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft  routing method based on detection frames     August 2009


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   2.  Terminology used in this document . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   3.  Problem statement and analysis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Proposed Solutions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     8.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8






































Wei                     Expires February 8, 2010                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft  routing method based on detection frames     August 2009


1.  Introduction

   This document presents a routing method based on detection frame.
   Transmission of each hop does not need to wait for a specific node to
   wake up.  As long as there is a node who wakes up and has lower
   routing metrics to reach destination node, it can be used to forward
   data.  This method increases the robustness of the network and
   reduces the demand for routing repair.


2.  Terminology used in this document

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].


3.  Problem statement and analysis

   In the communication network, each routing node will set up a routing
   table.  Such as AODV routing algorithm, in the initial establish of
   routing table, routing node broadcast route discovery order which
   contains address of destination node to the nodes around.  The nodes
   that receive the route discovery order would check the address of
   destination node and compare with their own address.  If the
   addresses are the same, the nodes send back the routing information
   to the routing node establishing the routing along the reverse path;
   If not, it can record the reverse path to the note initiating the
   route discovery order, forward the broadcast of route discovery order
   until the order reach the destination node, and then return the
   routing information to the node establishing the routing along the
   reverse path.  In the route discovery process, the feedback of
   routing information from the destination node may be more than one.
   The node can select a routing who has the minimum routing metrics
   stored in the routing table in a certain selection principle based on
   a number of network performance parameters which referred to as the
   "routing metrics".  In the process of date transmission, the routing
   node can handle address information in the packets and be in the role
   of transferring data.  When receives a data packet, the routing node
   checks the address of destination node.  If the address is in the
   routing table, transmit the data packet to the next hop stored in the
   routing table; if not, it has to decide whether to star the route
   discovery process according to business requirement.

   Low-power routing node has not only the characteristics of common
   routing node, but also the characteristic of long-term hibernation,
   i.e. a low-power routing node is not keep in the state of working,
   but regularly sleeps in order to maintain a state of lower energy



Wei                     Expires February 8, 2010                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft  routing method based on detection frames     August 2009


   consumption.

   When transmits data in LLNs, if adopts the existing routing, such as
   AODV, it needs to wait for next hop to wake up to send data packets,
   which will result in more delay.

   Such as in building automation routing, sensing devices will, in some
   cases, utilize battery power or energy harvesting techniques for
   power and will operate mostly in a sleep mode to maintain power
   consumption within a modest budget.  The routing protocol MUST take
   into account device characteristics such as power budget.  If such
   devices provide routing, rather than merely host connectivity, the
   energy costs associated with such routing needs to fit within the
   power budget.  If the mechanisms for duty cycling dictate very long
   response times or specific temporal scheduling, routing will need to
   take such constraints into account.  Typically, batteries need to be
   operational for at least 5 years when the sensing device is
   transmitting its data (e.g. 64 octets) once per minute.  This
   requires that sleeping devices MUST have minimal link on time when
   they awake and transmit onto the network.  Moreover, maintaining the
   ability to receive inbound data MUST be accomplished with minimal
   link on time [I-D.ietf-roll-building-routing-reqs].

   In addition, the wake-up interval of a sleeping node MUST be less
   than one second in home rooting[I-D.ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs].


4.  Proposed Solutions

   Based on the issues above, this document presents a routing method
   based on routing metrics .  Transmission of each hop does not need to
   wait for a specific node to wake up.  As long as there is a node who
   wakes up and has lower routing metrics to reach destination node, it
   can be used to forward data.  This is a greedy algorithm, which in
   fact, has lower average delay and better robustness.

   When routers communicate in LLNs, the sender need to send detection
   frames, and the receiver return response frames after receiving
   detection frames.  When the sender receives response frame, it can
   know that the receiver is in active state.  Then it sends data packet
   to the receiver.  If not receives response frame in the specified
   time, this date sending is failed.  In broadcast communication, the
   sender needs to send consecutive detection frames, even more than the
   longest sleep cycles of all neighbor nodes, to ensure that all
   neighbor nodes wake up, and then broadcast data.  The following is
   the specific analysis.

   The cost parameters of nodes can be determined in the process of



Wei                     Expires February 8, 2010                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft  routing method based on detection frames     August 2009


   route discovery.  The cost parameter could be the number of hop and /
   or cumulative link-quality-assessment function, as well as power
   consumption or time delay.  Take AODV as an example.  In the process
   of route discovery, the nodes on the different path stored the cost
   parameters to the destination node.  In order to form a multi-path,
   the destination node needs to return a number of routing response
   along different path.  The destination node returns routing response
   by broadcast.  The nodes receiving the broadcast have to determine if
   they are source, or whether the cache has route discovery information
   reached the destination node.  If is the source node, cumulates the
   cost of this section and record the total cost, and then no longer be
   dealt with.  If it is not the source node, but the cache has the
   route discovery information reached the destination node, the
   cumulate cost of this paragraph, and re-broadcast routing response
   order.  If it is not the source node and the route discovery
   information reached destination node does not in the cache found the,
   then discards the routing response order.  Another to form a multi-
   path is" Many to One" route discovery, i.e. the destination node
   initiates the broadcast of route discovery orders, node who is the
   first time to receive the order, then cumulates the cost of this
   section and records the total cost to the destination node, and re-
   broadcasts route discovery order, if not the first time to receive
   the order, compares with the cost record, if the radio cost just
   received is lower, then makes the record update to be the lower cost
   and re-broadcast route discovery order, otherwise discards the
   broadcast order received, that is, only record and forward the route
   discovery order of lower cost.  So that the cost parameters to
   destination node finally be recorded in each node.

   In the process of data transmission, the routing table corresponding
   to each destination node's address does not need to specify a
   specific next hop address, but the record of the cost parameters,
   which choose next hop based on real-time path.  The sender sends
   detection frames which include the address of detection nodes and the
   cost parameters.  The receiver checks routing table after receipt of
   detection frame.  If there is the address of corresponding
   destination node with a lower cost parameter, or if it is the
   destination node, then returns a response with the cost parameter.
   After receiving a response, the sender selects the node with the
   lowest cost parameter as the next hop to send data.  Therefore, when
   sending data, it does not need to wait special next hop node to wake
   up.  The neighbor nodes who is first to wake up can be used to send
   data .So the transmission delay in LLNs can be reduced.

   Assume that period of sleep time of routers in LLNs is S, the active
   time is A, the cost parameters is indicated by hops.  Each hop, if
   can only be forwarded through a specific router, then the average
   waiting time of each hop to send data is S^2/[2(S+A)].  If we adopt



Wei                     Expires February 8, 2010                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft  routing method based on detection frames     August 2009


   this method, assume that there are two links for each hop to reach
   the destination node.  Data can be sent each time as long as there is
   any active neighbor node.  So the average waiting time of each hop is
   S^3/[3(S+A)^2] .  It shows that delay time has been reduced.  If each
   hop has more neighbor nodes to reach the destination node, then the
   average delay can be reduced much more.

   Reducing of the average delay time means that the router can reduce
   the waiting time for the next hop node to wake up time, reduce the
   sending of wake-up detection frame, and thus reduce energy
   consumption and interference to the outside.  Also as each hop may
   have several options links, which increase the robustness of the
   network and reduce the demand for routing repair.


5.  Security Considerations

   TBD


6.  IANA Considerations

   TBD


7.  Acknowledgments

   TBD


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

8.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-roll-building-routing-reqs]
              Martocci, J., Riou, N., Mil, P., and W. Vermeylen,
              "Building Automation Routing Requirements in Low Power and
              Lossy Networks", draft-ietf-roll-building-routing-reqs-05
              (work in progress), February 2009.

   [I-D.ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs]
              Porcu, G., "Home Automation Routing Requirements in Low
              Power and Lossy Networks",



Wei                     Expires February 8, 2010                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft  routing method based on detection frames     August 2009


              draft-ietf-roll-home-routing-reqs-06 (work in progress),
              November 2008.


Author's Address

   Anni Wei
   Huawei Technologies
   Huawei Building, Xinxi Road No.3
   Haidian District, Beijing  100085
   P. R. China

   Phone: +86-10-82836297
   Email: weianni@huawei.com





































Wei                     Expires February 8, 2010                [Page 8]


