A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3367

        Title:      Common Name Resolution Protocol (CNRP)
        Author(s):  N. Popp, M. Mealling, M. Moseley
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       August 2002
        Mailbox:    npopp@verisign.com, michael@verisignlabs.com,
                    marshall@netword.com 
        Pages:      42
        Characters: 86889
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-cnrp-12.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3367.txt


People often refer to things in the real world by a common name or
phrase, e.g., a trade name, company name, or a book title.  These
names are sometimes easier for people to remember and type than URLs.
Furthermore, because of the limited syntax of URLs, companies and
individuals are finding that the ones that might be most reasonable
for their resources are being used elsewhere and so are unavailable.
For the purposes of this document, a "common name" is a word or a
phrase, without imposed syntactic structure, that may be associated
with a resource.

This effort is about the creation of a protocol for client
applications to communicate with common name resolution services, as
exemplified in both the browser enhancement and search site
paradigms.  Although the protocol's primary function is resolution,
it is also intended to address issues of internationalization and
localization.  Name resolution services are not generic search
services and thus do not need to provide complex Boolean query,
relevance ranking or similar capabilities.  The protocol is a simple,
minimal interoperable core.  Mechanisms for extension are provided,
so that additional capabilities can be added.

This document is a product of the Common Name Resolution Protocol
Working Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
