A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3456

        Title:      Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCPv4)
                    Configuration of IPsec Tunnel Mode
        Author(s):  B. Patel, B. Aboba, S. Kelly, V. Gupta
        Status:     Standards Track
        Date:       January 2003
        Mailbox:    baiju.v.patel@intel.com, bernarda@microsoft.com,
                    scott@hyperthought.com, vipul.gupta@sun.com
        Pages:      18
        Characters: 40340
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-ipsec-dhcp-13.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3456.txt


This memo explores the requirements for host configuration in IPsec
tunnel mode, and describes how the Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol
(DHCPv4) may be leveraged for configuration.  In many remote access
scenarios, a mechanism for making the remote host appear to be present
on the local corporate network is quite useful.  This may be
accomplished by assigning the host a "virtual" address from the
corporate network, and then tunneling traffic via IPsec from the
host's ISP-assigned address to the corporate security gateway.  In
IPv4, DHCP provides for such remote host configuration.

This document is a product of the IPSEC Remote Access (IPSRA) Working
Group of the IETF.

This is now a Proposed Standard Protocol.

This document specifies an Internet standards track protocol for
the Internet community, and requests discussion and suggestions
for improvements.  Please refer to the current edition of the
"Internet Official Protocol Standards" (STD 1) for the
standardization state and status of this protocol.  Distribution
of this memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.

