
Routing Research Group                               Heiner Hummel 
Internet Draft                                               
Intended status: Informational                    September 19, 2010 
Expires: March,22 2011 
                                   
 
              Topology Aggregating Routing Architecture 
                    draft-hummel-tara-00.txt 


Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on March 21, 2011.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.
    This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.










 
Hummel               Expires March 20, 2011                [Page 1] 
 
Internet-Draft       TARA                   September  2010 
    

Abstract 

   This draft outlines a new routing architecture which I like to
   call TARA = Topology Aggregating Routing Architecture. Its primary
   objective is to eliminate the so-called scalability problem as
   proclaimed by RFC4984. By overcoming the true causes of this 
   problem - which are indeed some holy routing paradigms - it may 
   serve as the base for much better routing.   
 

1.Introduction and motivation

   This draft outlines a new routing architecture which I like to
   call TARA =  Topology Aggregating Routing Architecture. Its primary
   objective is to eliminate the so-called scalability problem as
   proclaimed by RFC4984. By overcoming the true causes of this 
   problem  - which are indeed some holy routing paradigms  - it may 
   serve as the base for much better routing. Just one single example:
   ECMP is by far not the end of better routing. In many cases routing 
   via some more distant node is the only existing alternative to some 
   single shortest path. However by sticking to Distance Vector inter-
   domain forwarding will never ever enable such alternatives.

   TARA will abolish the crazily excessive RIB/FIB memory consumption! 
   Today, a BGP-router collects millions of downstream paths and yet 
   is unable to see and utilize any upstream path - neither for 
   forwarding (detour), nor for  traffic load handling.
   TARA will abolish the crazily excessive UPDATE-churn! The hereby 
   consumed CPU-performance may better be used for well concerted 
   and well scoped traffic load notification messages.
   TARA will make Moore's law become applicable: Next-hop selection 
   will be done by either one or three indexed table element lookups. 
   No FIB binary search and no caching is needed.
   Furthermore, the IPv4 address depletion will become a non-issue, 
   because global uniqueness of the IPv4 address won't be required 
   anymore. Because the destination's  IP address is not evaluated
   prior having reached  the TARA-ETR, its  uniqueness is just
   required within the local scope between TARA-ETR and egress
   router.    










Hummel               Expires March 20, 2011                [Page 2] 
 
Internet-Draft       TARA                   September  2010


   TARA will transform the internet topology agnostic BGP to become an 
   internet topology aware BGP ! It will transform the Distance-Vector-
   based BGP to become a Dijkstra-(and Beyond-Dijkstra- ) based BGP! 
   By means of BGP UPDATE extensions several (e.g. 5) differently 
   zoomed i.e. differently skimmed topologies of the entire internet 
   will be "produced". It will be done in such a way that no single 
   TARA-router would neither see nor be burdened with seeing the entire 
   flat topology of the nearest zooming level 1. All TARA-routers, some 
   by doing more, some by doing less,  will participate in this well 
   concerted process to produce the knowledge about these five 
   topologies as well as how they can be combined to become one single
   TARA-map such that each TARA-router may find itself completely 
   surrounded by TARA-links from the zooming level 1 map, which 
   themselves are  surrounded by TARA links from the zooming level 2 
   map,  etc. - coarsely sketched (because there will also be strict
   links to some very remote node which can eventually only show up
   in the map of  zooming level 5).
   
   The Google route planer tool is best suitable to demonstrate how 
   TARA functions. On a slow computer you may even see the hereby 
   needed geopatch subdivisioning when, upon changing the zooming level, 
   the parts of the new  picture pop up square by square.
   In addition, a (globally operating) ISP-network may communicate, 
   internally by OSPF, all its internal TARA-links, no matter how many 
   geopatches they would span, and add the resulting topology to the 
   TARA-map.This may be utilized by some ISP-policy which rather wants 
   to forward the packets internally than externally along the shortest 
   path.From the TARA-map the proper tables and their contents will be 
   derived which will enable the next-hop determination by means of one, 
   respectively three table offsets.
 
   TARA will eliminate the scalability problem once and forever, i.e. 
   even if the internet were a thousand or a million times bigger than 
   it is today:In case the growing internet would require some 
   adjustment, all it takes is to add some additional zooming levels,
   or some more intensive scale ratios. Note, although the internet is
   fairly small we nevertheless need to have at least 5 zooming levels
   (to avoid the Istanbul effect, see below). This also means that 
   the to be applied scale ratios for computing the less zoomed maps
   will rather be like 1:4 than 1:10.
      
 
   

 






Hummel               Expires March 20, 2011                [Page 3] 
 
Internet-Draft       TARA                   September  2010


2. Basic aspects and definitions

   Definition : A (m,n)-geopatch cluster is a matrix of m rows and n 
   columns of (1,1)-geopatches.
   A (1,1)-geopatch is an area which is limited by two adjacent 
   longitudes and two adjacent latitudes (resp. at the poles by two 
   adjacent longitudes and one latitude).

   The TARA protocol shall standardize:
   - the number of zooming levels (e.g. five),
   - the clustering of (n,m)-geo-patches per zooming level, 
   - and rules which determine the scale ratio for computing a 
     geopatch'es/geopatch cluster's contribution for a next upper 
     level topology

   Proposed clustering per Zooming level:
   Zooming level 1:There are    180x360=64800 (1,1)-geo-patches
   Zooming level 2:There may be 60x120= 7200 (3,3)-geo-patches
   Zooming level 3:There may be 30 x 60= 1800 (6,6)-geo-patches
   Zooming level 4:There may be 15 x 30= 450 (12,12)-geo-patches
   Zooming level 5:There may be 5x10= 50 (36,36)-geo-patches
 
   Numbering scheme:
   The (1,1)-geo-patches are numbered from 1 to 64800, starting at the 
   South Pole with that (1,1)-geo-patch which is limited by the two 
   longitude degrees 0 and 1 East, the South Pole and latitude 89 South, 
   winding from there in East bound direction, while forming a full 
   circle such that number 360 is assigned to that (1,1)-geo-patch, 
   which is limited by the two longitude degrees 1 West and 0,and number
   361 is assigned to that (1,1,)-geo-patch,which is limited by the
   longitude degrees 0 and 1 East and the latitudes 89 South and 88
   South. While winding in East bound direction and while winding 
   towards the North Pole, the last number 64800 is assigned to that 
   (1,1)-geo-patch which is limited by the longitudes 1 West and 0, 
   the latitude 89 North and the North Pole.
   The limiting line to the West and the limiting line to the South 
   (resp. the South Pole) themselves will belong to the hereby bordered 
   (1,1)-geo-patch.
   The geopatch number (geopatch#) is also called square degree#.

   Analogous is the numbering for (n,m)-geo-patch clusters. 
   (m,n)-geopatch clusters of a particular zooming level >1 are also 
   numbered in the Eastbound from south to north pole spinning fashion.
   Any router inside a particular  (1,1)-geo-patch whose geopatch# = x1 
   may want to know the numbers x2, x3, x4, x5 of the  (n,m)-geo-patch
   clusters it belongs to at the respective zooming levels 2, 3, 4, 5.  



Hummel               Expires March 20, 2011                [Page 4] 
 
Internet-Draft       TARA                   September  2010


   They are:
   x2 = int ( ( x1 +8)/9 )
   x3 = int ( ( x1 +35)/36 )
   x4 = int ( ( x1 +143)/144 )
   x5 = int ( ( x1 +1295)/1296 )
 
   Deriving the (1,1)-geo-patch-# from the geographical coordinates:

   The mapping from geographical coordinates to the geo-location-ID may 
   be done as follows:
   We introduce new LO_ngitude D_egree LOD and new LA_titude D_egree
   LAD, which are consecutive from 1 to 360 resp. from 1 to 180, i.e. 
   without the East versus West resp.North versus South differentiation.
 

   If x is 0 (Greenwich) or some degree East of Greenwich then 
   LOD = x+1.
   If x is some degree West of Greenwich then LOD = 360-x.
   If y is 0 (equator) or some degree North  of the equator then 
   LAD = 90 + y+1
   If y is some degree South of the equator then LAD = 90-y

   Hence any  (1,1)- geo-patch may be identified by {LOD, LAD} 
   respectively by its number:
   square-degree # = (LAD-1) * 360 + LOD.

   Extension with respect to minutes:

   We introduce new LO_ngitude M_inute LOM and new LA_titude M_inute 
   LAM, which are both numbers from 1 to 60 .

   If (0<=x<60) is some minute not West  of Greenwich then LOM = x+1.
   If (0<=x<60) is some minute West of Greenwich then LOM = 60-x.
   If (0<=y<60) is some minute not South  of the equator then LAM=y+1.
   If (0<=y<60) is some minute South of the equator then LAM = 60-y.

   So any square-minute geo-patch inside some (1,1)- geo-patch may be
   identified by: square-minute #  = (LAM-1) * 60 + LOM.
   A square-minute encompasses its rim to its West and to its South.

   Extension with respect to seconds:
 
   We introduce new longitude second LOS and new latitude second LAS, 
   which are both numbers from 1 to 60 .

   If (0<=x<=59) is some second not West of Greenwich then LOS = x+1.
   If (0<=x<=59) is some second West of Greenwich then LOS = 60-x


Hummel               Expires March 20, 2011                [Page 5] 
 
Internet-Draft       TARA                   September  2010


   If (0<=y<=59) is some second not South  of the equator then 
   LAS = y+1.
   If (0<=y<=59) is some second South of the equator then 
   LAS = 60-y.

   So any square-second geo-patch inside some   geo-patch square minute 
   may be identified by :
   { LOS , LAS }

   In summary, the geo-location-id of any TARA-router respectively of 
   any destination user is given by its 

   TARA-Locator = { 
         square-degree #,     //  Range 1 to 64800      16 bits
         square-minute #,     //  Range 1 to 3600       12 bits
         LOS,                 //  Range 1 to 60          6 bits
         LAS                  //  Range 1 to 60          6 bits
                  }.
   Note: For practical reason we do not build a square-second value, 
         see below.
   Note: Inverse mapping from TARA-Locator to the geographical 
         coordinates is always possible, too.

   Finer granularity ?  We may anticipate finer granularity to identify 
   fractions of square seconds.
   But right now there is no urgent need for it.

3. TARA concept

   Analogously to Google-map several (e.g. five) internet topologies of 
   different zooming levels shall be constructed by the concerted effort
   of all TARA routers. From some outside point of view there will
   be 5 maps. The nearest zoom topology will be the precise topology of 
   the entire internet. By some algorithm the closer zoomed map will 
   be skimmed for generating the less zoomed map - recursively four 
   times. All TARA-routers all over the earth will learn/see the whole 
   least zoomed map,whereas TARA-routers of a well confined geographical 
   area will only see their respective closest zoomed map excerpt. 
   All TARA-routers will contribute, especially border nodes which are 
   adjacent to neighboring geopatches / geopatch-clusters,  as to build 
   these 5 maps. A strict protocol-based ordering (who mends on which 
   piece) will make sure that the map pieces will fit together at their 
   rims.Furthermore, the maps of zooming levels 2,3 and 4 must be made 
   scrollable such that each TARA-router may conceive itself being 
   fairly at the center of all seen upper maps. By this "scrolling"  
   the Istanbul effect will be avoided. 
   Istanbul effect means: It would be bad if a city map of Istanbul 


Hummel               Expires March 20, 2011                [Page 6] 
 
Internet-Draft       TARA                   September  2010


   contained the European part with all the details, but for the Asian 
   part just what you get about Istanbul from a road map for whole Asia. 

   This also shows that at least 5 zooming levels are needed although 
   the internet with just 10 000 DFZ-routers is fairly small. 
   Note: The maps of geopatch and geopatch-clusters a TARA-router would
   hereby get might be viewed as hierarchical routing. However, catering
   64800 hierarchies rather than just one! Also: There is no stretch 
   factor 3 or 17 to be observed. The way how the loose TARA-links are
   constructed will always comply with stretch 1.

   By means of a simple BGP UPDATE message extension a TARA router may 
   advertise its existence, i.e.:  
   - the originating TARA-router A, its IP address and its TARA-locator

   and its adjacent TARA-links i.e.:
   - the zooming level (1 to 5) indicating the respectively zoomed map  
   - the respective geopatch (cluster) # 
   - the remote endpoint TARA-router B, with its
        -   IP address and its 
        -   TARA-locator
   - the weight of this TARA-link (= 1 if strict link, =number of its 
     hops if loose link)
   - link type (strict, loose, "GRE-tunnel" crossing some non-TARA 
     network part)
   - purpose of propagation ("for building upper maps" or for 
     "scrolling")
   - more  (like additional info for scrolling,or 
     optionally:explicit list of geopatch numbers the two link-adjacent 
     TARA-routers would represent)

   A TARA-link shall be advertised by that endnode which has the 
   smaller IP address.During the incremental deployment phase these
   UPDATE messages,for zoom level 1, will be disseminated worldwide.
   Thereafter, dissemination may be well-scoped according to the 
   originator's TARA-locator and the zooming level information.
   A TARA-link is of type "strict" if both ends of the physical link 
   are TARA-routers. A TARA-link is of type  "GRE-tunnel" if a single 
   GRE-Tunnel is needed to "connect its endpoint TARA-routers across 
   classical internet routers. Hereby a to be standardized rule is 
   required for assigning an adequate weight value (e.g. based on 
   classical BGP path length information, or based on the spheric geo-
   distance).A TARA-link is of type "loose" if it is rather a path which
   consists of multiple concatenated TARA-links, each of which is of any
   of the three link types.   




Hummel               Expires March 20, 2011                [Page 7] 
 
Internet-Draft       TARA                   September  2010


   At first a TARA-router will advertise its existence and also that it 
   can reach prefixes of length zero (default mapper). It will be 
   propagated worldwide  by BGP UPDATE. 
   Non-TARA-routers will only evaluate classical information, whereas 
   TARA-routers will recognize the contained TARA-information.   
   Later on, TARA-routers will also advertise  their strict adjacent 
   TARA-links which shall be propagated onwards such that miniclusters 
   are generated where each participating TARA-router will get to
   know the topology of this mini-cluster. One of them needs to be 
   identified which shall establish a "GRE-Tunnel"-TARA-link to some 
   nearest TARA-router inside the same geopatch. Peu a peu all TARA-
   routers inside some geopatch will learn their common intra-geopatch 
   topology. 

   Sustained by GRE-tunneling technique the TARA-link propagation can 
   be done such that only TARA-routers will get to see the propagated 
   TARA information. 

   Furthermore, a TARA-router, whose absolutely nearest  neighboring 
   TARA-router is from some other geopatch, shall establish a 
   respective strict ore GRE-type TARA-link and propagate it intra-
   geopatch wide. 
   In case there is still no TARA-link between two adjacent geopatches 
   A and B although nA and nB TARA-nodes exist and are known by all 
   nA + nB TARA-routers, some algorithm shall be applied to select a 
   pair of  TARA-routers (out from nA * nB many combinations) which 
   shall establish a TARA-GRE-Tunnel as to interconnect the two 
   adjacent geopatches. 
   An analogous procedure may apply that leads to establishing a TARA-
   link for some higher zooming level's  topology in order to inter-
   connect two adjacent higher-level geopatch clusters ( because at 
   lower levels at least one of the adjacent geopatch /geopatch cluster 
   is completely without any TARA-router).
 
   Additionally, TARA-routers of different geopatches  may realize 
   that there is a strict TARA-link between them, whereby their 
   (1,1)-geopatches are not adjacent ( Note: Apart from geopatches 
   adjacent to the poles, each geopatch is surrounded by 8 geopatches: 
   to the North, East,South,West,NE,SE,SW,NW) .  
   We have to identify the smallest zooming level i for which both 
   endpoints have the same geopatch cluster-# xi (i from 3 to 5) and 
   propagate a respective TARA-link at that particular zooming level i.

   As a result, all TARA-routers of the same geopatch will learn the 
   entire set of TARA-links which form an intra-geopatch topology and 
   also TARA-links to the outside of their geopatches, and also some 
   of the TARA-links of upper zooming levels' topologies. TARA-link


Hummel               Expires March 20, 2011                [Page 8] 
 
Internet-Draft       TARA                   September  2010 


   propagation may be done by some flooding technique and also with 
   the help of GRE-tunneling such that only TARA-routers get to see 
   these BGP UPDATE messages carrying TARA-links. They will be able 
   to limit spreading to neighboring TARA-routers such that it is only 
   flooded among  TARA-routers within the own geopatch resp. own 
   geopatch cluster. 

   By means of a very TARA-essential algorithm/mechanism each intra-
   geopatch TARA-router is enabled to compute the same identical well 
   skimmed representative topology for that geopatch which  shall 
   become part of the next upper zooming level's topology. Some to be 
   standardized rules will be required as to determine the adequate 
   scale ratio to be applied. A desert type area with only a few nodes 
   might get scale ratio 1:1, whereas a metropolitain area with many 
   nodes may need scale ratio 1:10. 
   For comparison: A map for the Death Valley desert contains almost 
   each shack whereas a not so detailed map for a huge city might not 
   even contain all streets. I.e. a standardized table shall prescribe 
   which scale ratio is to be applied for any given density of nodes. 
   Also note that the resulting strict/loose TARA-links will have 
   weights equal to the number of  hops between their endpoint TARA-
   nodes.
   Border nodes, adjacent to neighboring geopatches will play an 
   important role. 
 
   A border node will communicate all computed upper zoom TARA-links 
   to the neighboring geopatch where they are disseminated all over. 
   Inversely: It will receive such links from the neighboring geopatch 
   for dissemination all over the own geopatch. This process needs to 
   cover all geopatches of some well identified cluster.   
   The set of all TARA-links of zoom level 2 of the respective 
   geopatch cluster will form the basis for computing a well skimmed 
   topology for becoming part of the zoom level 3 topology, etc. There 
   will be recursively- 4 times such a process as to compute all upper 
   zooming levels' topologies. The computation will of course consider
   that there are already some pre-set TARA-nodes and TARA-links of 
   whichever upper zooming level's topology as described above.

   When all topologies of all zooming levels are computed we can take 
   for granted that each TARA-router will see the total TARA-topology 
   of its own geopatch (zooming level 1) as well as the total TARA-
   topology of the highest zooming level 5. It will see TARA-topology
   excerpts of the zooming levels in-between. In order to avoid the 
   Istanbul effect, we need some "scroll" mechanism, i.e. some 
   additional mechanism for dissemnating TARA-links for the zooming 
   levels 2,3 and 4, such that each geopatch may conceive itself being
   the center geopatch of the entire world. I.e.geopatches at the rim 


Hummel               Expires March 20, 2011                [Page 9] 
 
Internet-Draft       TARA                   September  2010


   of some geopatch cluster shall also get to know about TARA-links of
   the near surrounding although they haven't been involved in creating
   them. 

   Finally, each TARA-router must be enabled to combine the viewed 
   topologies such that the more detailed topology replaces the 
   respective piece of the next upper zooming level's topology as to 
   form one single flat TARA-map. Hereby special attention is to be 
   given to those TARA-links which perform the binding, i.e. which have 
   to be split into a lower level link-part and an upper level link-part
   (with a third node that connects the two pieces).


   Filling and using TARA- forwarding tables:

   Based on its TARA-map a TARA-router computes the entries of its 
   TARA-forwarding tables as described by the following. Based on the 
   destination TARA-locator as of some received IP packet's prepended 
   TARA-header a TARA-router retrieves the next hop information from its 
   TARA- forwarding tables as described by the following as well.
 
   Destination is outside from the current router's (1,1)-geo-patch:
   For the sake of forwarding to another (1,1)-geo-patch the current 
   router shall maintain a table t1 with 64800  next-hop entries. By 
   means of one Dijkstra it computes the next-hop to all nodes of the 
   TARA-map. At first let's consider those nodes which have a different 
   geopatch number than the current router itself. Among them, we select
   the one which is nearest according to their Dijkstra path lengths 
   and enter with proper geopatch# offset the respective bestnext hop 
   into table t1. 

   There will be many t1-offsets with  would probable index some ocean 
   or desert area where there is no single TARA-router.These t1-offset 
   elements will be some default value but should never be used. There 
   may be others for which the TARA-map doesn't have some node. Here, 
   we should look for the relative closest TARA-router which happens 
   to be in the TARA-map, and have entered its respective (proxy) best 
   next hop here as well. 
 
   Destination is inside of the current router's (1,1)-geo-patch:

   We cannot afford a 3600 times 3600=12,960,000 entries sized table, 
   i.e. a matrix for each square second.
   Hence, for the sake of forwarding to any TARA-router x from  the 
   current router's  (1,1)-geo-patch we employ tables t2, t3, t4. 
   Table t2, indexed by TARA-router X's square-minute number, will 
   refer to some table t3.


Hummel               Expires March 20, 2011                [Page 10] 
 
Internet-Draft       TARA                   September  2010


   Table t3, indexed by  TARA-router X's LOS, will refer to some table 
   t4. Table t4, indexed by TARA-router X's LAS, will contain the next 
   hop towards X. or an indication that the current router is already 
   the egress. In this case forwarding shall take place classically.

   There will be just one single table t1 with 64800 entries.
   There will be just one single (sparsely filled) table t2 with 3600 
   entries ( a minority of these entries refer to some  particular  
   t3-tables)
   There will be multiple tables t3 with 60 entries each. 
   There will be multiple table t4 with 60 entries each.

   When an IP-packet with a prepended TARA-header is received the next 
   hop is determined as follows:
   Take the received destination TARA-locator.
   Is its square-degree# equal to the current router's square-degree# ?
   If No, index table t1 with the received square degree# and retrieve 
   next hop info.
   Else take the received square minute# to offset table t2 for 
   retrieving a particular table t3.
   Index table t3 with the received LOS for retrieving a particular 
   table t4.
   Index table t4 with the received LAS for retrieving the next hop 
   information.
   The hereby retrieved next hop information will indicate the physical 
   link for next hop forwarding plus  eventually some instruction to 
   GRE-encapsulate the packet prior forwarding to the endpoint node of 
   this next hop TARA-link. 
   Or: It indicates that the current router is the endpoint of TARA 
   forwarding.

   As a result next hop lookup becomes very fast and will enable 
   Moore's law applicability to internet packet forwarding. No caching 
   is required either.

   In case the best hop information shall be replaced by some other 
   (due to congestion or for traffic balancing reasons), the 
   information of the LAS-indexed t4-table ( or the square-degree#-
   indexed t1 table) can be replaced (e.g. temporarily). This means, 
   even alternative forwarding can be done equally fast, i.e. wouldn't
   jeopardize Moore's law applicability.

4. Starting TARA  forwarding:

   At first, packet forwarding is explained while assuming that TARA 
   were completely deployed. Thereafter several solutions are shown how 
   to do packet forwarding while TARA is about to be introduced.


Hummel               Expires March 20, 2011                [Page 11] 
 
Internet-Draft       TARA                   September  2010


4.1 TARA - fully deployed:
   The source user sends a DNS-lookup request message and is returned 
   not only the destination IP address but also its geographical 
   coordinates according to the so far experimental RFC1712.
   The source user will prepend a TARA-header which contains the 
   TARA-locators of both source and destination.  
   Or:
   The ingress TARA-router intercepts the returned response of the 
   DNS-lookup,reads the contained geographical coordinates, derives 
   the respective TARA-locator, and stores it in such a way that it 
   can be retrieved based on the respective IP address. The ingress 
   TARA-router prepends a TARA-header and forwarding is done according 
   to TARA. This alternative, additional solution will enable TARA-
   forwarding without involving end-users.  

4.2 TARA - incremental deployment phase:

   It may happen that the DNS-lookup request message is not returning 
   the geographical coordinates of the destination, nor do neither the 
   source user nor any router along the packet's path know the 
   destination's TARA-locator. Then forwarding must be done classically.
   I.e. then even the TARA-router must still operate with its 
   traditional FIB and RIB in this situation.

   It may happen that the source host has appended a TARA-header, but 
   the ingress router is not a TARA-router.By assuming that the
   destination's TARA-xTR doesn't advertise prefixes with respect to its 
   reachable users,but by also assuming that any TARA-router propagates
   reachability for prefix length zero, that some TARA-router which is 
   nearest to the ingress router, i.e. some TARA-ITR, will attract the 
   packets and will then proceed with TARA forwarding.
   In this was it may as well attract packets with no prepended TARA-
   header and may act as proxy:consult DNS,inversely lookup the TARA-
   locator,prepend a TARA-header,... 
 
   Indeed, TARA routers would stop advertising reachability 
   information with respect to attached users! As a result, the 
   classical FIBs would shrink the more TARA is deployed and may 
   extinct finally.
 
   How to forward the TARA-locators? By means of a  TARA-header, 
   -shim/label , IMAC-embedded?  
 
   TARA-header:
   LISP uses a prepended LISP-header to forward the IPv4 addresses of 
   ITR and ETR. Likewise, TARA may prepend a TARA-header (and adopt 
   whichever useful LISP-header detail).


Hummel               Expires March 20, 2011                [Page 12] 
 
Internet-Draft       TARA                   September  2010


   TARA-shim/label:
   The TARA-locator could be understood as a globally significant 
   label, as opposed to the MPLS-labels of local significance.  
   TARA-forwarding as a new form of label-switching ? 

   TARA-locators embedded in MAC address:
   MAC-addresses just provide a great probability of uniqueness. Why 
   can't the initial value be replaced by some other but as well 
   globally unique data which is also routable ? We are all used to 
   "getting a weird initial password" which we then may modify as to 
   please ourselves?!

   Having   an (extendable) TARA-header would be the best solution 
   among all, because the not mentioned alternative,  embedding the 
   TARA-locator into the IPv6-address, though simpliest at all, is not
   a real alternative, because IPv4 must not be neglected (particularly, 
   as there is no necessity for neglecting IPv4 ). 
   Indeed, a new TARA-header would enable to place additional flags 
   and attributes into this header for further capabilities which will 
   go far beyond today's state-of-art routing.

5. Further aspects and advantages

5.1 TARA intra-domain:

   It is quite obviously that  topology-aware TARA-routing would also 
   fit for topology-aware intra-domain routing. Advantages:  Intra-
   domain address prefix building and dissemination isn't required 
   anymore either. The same fast forwarding that enables Moore's law 
   application will happen also intra-domain ( about 20 times faster 
   next hop retrieval). The TARA-map as of above  should be enhanced 
   with the intra-domain TARA-closest zoom map and made available 
   for the intra-domain nodes, wheras a respective less zoomed map (as 
   would please the ISP's policy) may be advertised to the external 
   internet. 
   Where shall TARA-forwarding end ?  Currently at some ETR-DFZ-
   router.Indeed, the current TARA concept assumes globally unique TARA-
   locators of the xTR-DFZ-routers, which are assigned by these DFZ-
   routers to the individual end users too. Obviously the chance is 
   small that two DFZ-routers would come up with the same TARA-locator.
   








Hummel               Expires March 20, 2011                [Page 13] 
 
Internet-Draft       TARA                   September  2010


   In case of a clash however there are several ways to overcome this 
   clash: 
   a) negotiation protocol between these 2 nodes
   b) cheating while DNS registering (it is not important whether the 
      LAS and LOS values are absolutely in compliance with the 
      DFZ-routers geographical location because shortest path means 
      least amount of hops and not shortest spheric arc.)

   In a long-term view, TARA-forwarding may end at the egress router 
   or  even at the host itself: 
   The end user may register itself at the DNS indicating some IPv4 ? 
   some HIT ? some name? Or some  E164 ?  Extending the network so that 
   the end users are also nodes wouldn't be a big problem:
   It means that there are several nodes with the same identical 
   geographical coordinates, eventually. They and also their neighboring 
   pre-ultimate hop nodes should be aware of what additional information 
   needs to be checked for proper forwarding and/or proper acknowledg-
   ment to be the right or wrong destination.
   Also, we can always introduce one ore two additional zooming levels 
   so that the total number of nodes of the entire internet becomes 
   billions rather than 10 000 (in case of DFZ-routers).

 

5.2 Multihoming:

   One IPv4-addressed end-user may have several TARA-locators (similar 
   to LISP).Which of them shall be in action ? The TARA-header 
   might convey e.g. one armed and one disarmed TARA-locator so 
   that any router inside the network were enabled to swap their 
   positions in this header.

5.3 Enhanced Multipath:

   Loopfree detours and even detours via more remote nodes (e.g. 
   crankback) can be enabled. Each node can, with respect to a given 
   destination TARA-locator classify ALL its adjacent links:
   From best (and ECMP-best), to detouring via equi-distant routers, 
   to detouring via more remote routers, to dead end i.e. no goes. All 
   it takes are a few flags in the TARA-header which eventually indicate
   a current detour-type ("detour via neighbors which all have the same 
   distance to the destination", or "detour via more remote explicitly 
   conveyed VIA-nodes", "detour because of congestion"). Other types 
   may envision time-of-day routing, east-bound /west-bound routing, or 
   Multihoming aspects (Multihoming is just a special sub-aspect of 
   Multipath. However, it is quite obvious that with DV-based routing
   you cannot do any better than ECMP.  


Hummel               Expires March 20, 2011                [Page 14] 
  
Internet-Draft       TARA                   September  2010

  
5.4 Mobility:

   TARA would enable mobile IP without the need of home-agents or 
   similar constructs (care-of-address servers,  TRs,..).  The DNS 
   might be the only place where the user's current location is stored, 
   i.e. no other entities that have to keep some respective "state". An 
   immediate DNS  update is  necessary only if the user moves to a 
   different geopatch i.e. finds there a new hosting DFZ-router. If it 
   roams within the same geopatch and  finds there a new hosting DFZ-
   router a geopatch-scoped broadcast search might be initiated by 
   any DFZ-router inside this geopatch as to find the actual hosting 
   node. Adequate algorithms may take care that loopfree broadcast 
   search messages can be sent out reachingg all nodes within the 
   indicated geopatch. 

5.5 State-less Multicast & mp2mp to millions of destinations:

   Cascade Tree routing will outperform all current Multicast-address 
   based models. 
   It may also be used for UNICAST download requests that occur within 
   some small time window. It would also be the best remedy ever for
   fighting DoS attacks: Most probably the burden would be shifted to 
   the attackers while the attacked sender keeps sending n-times with 
   n equals the degree of the cascading nodes.Assuming cascade degree 
   10 and assuming 20 hops being the average p2p path 99,5 % of the 
   involved routers won't need states.
 
5.6 Traffic balancing and congestion handling:

   The TARA map represents an intra- and inter-domain topology of 
   reasonable size which allows some TARA-(transit) router, to recognize
   with respect to some passing traffic flow the respective well 
   confined upstream surrounding and to exchange p2mp and mp2p traffic
   load relating notification messages in a well concerted way for 
   a) avoiding congestions in the first place, 
   b) handling congestions in the best possible manner such that 
      the point of congestion is not just re-located.
   Each node may algorithmically recognize the entireness of this 
   upstream surrounding, in particular its uppest rim. Some of them 
   may continue with forwarding packets towards the congested  node(s)
   while others may easily use /impose the use of a bypassing 
   alternative route. It is quite obvious that this requires topology 
   awareness which distance-vector based routing will never ever  
   provide  !!





Hummel               Expires March 20, 2011                [Page 15] 
 
Internet-Draft       TARA                   September  2010


5.7 Multi-Protocol-TARA forwarding

   The TARA-header doesn't care which other type of header it is 
   prepended to. It may be an IPv4-Header,or an IPv6-header, or a
   new E.164-Header (!) with no enum-mapping, or any HIP-Header,etc. 

6. Conclusion
 
   Though fundamentally different in spirit, the required protocol 
   extensions won't be such major. 2 or 3 years for protocol development
   will probably be sufficient. Thereafter TARA may be the base for many 
   new extensions towards a more intelligent network layer and for the 
   benefit of services we cannot even imagine today.


7. Authors' Addresses 

   Heiner Hummel
   www.hummel-research.de      
   Email: heinerhummel@aol.com 
 






















 
 
 



Hummel               Expires March 20, 2011                [Page 16]