A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3254

        Title:      Definitions for talking about directories
        Author(s):  H. Alvestrand
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       April 2002
        Mailbox:    Harald@alvestrand.no
        Pages:      11
        Characters: 21541
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-alvestrand-directory-defs-03.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3254.txt


When discussing systems for making information accessible through the
Internet in standardized ways, it may be useful if the people who are
discussing it have a common understanding of the terms they use.

For example, a reference to this document would give one the power to
agree that the DNS (Domain Name System) is a global lookup repository
with perimeter integrity and loose, converging consistency.  On the
other hand, a LDAP (Lightweight Directory Access Protocol) directory
server is a local, centralized repository with both lookup and search
capability. 

This document discusses one group of such systems which is known under
the term, "directories".

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.