
A new Request for Comments is now available in online RFC libraries.


        RFC 3076

        Title:      Canonical XML Version 1.0 
        Author(s):  J. Boyer
        Status:     Informational
        Date:       March 2001
        Mailbox:    jboyer@PureEdge.com
        Pages:      27
        Characters: 63955
        Updates/Obsoletes/SeeAlso:    None

        I-D Tag:    draft-ietf-xmldsig-canonical-01.txt

        URL:        ftp://ftp.rfc-editor.org/in-notes/rfc3076.txt


Any XML (Extensible Markup Language) document is part of a set of XML
documents that are logically equivalent within an application context,
but which vary in physical representation based on syntactic changes
permitted by XML 1.0 and Namespaces in XML.  This specification
describes a method for generating a physical representation, the
canonical form, of an XML document that accounts for the permissible
changes.  Except for limitations regarding a few unusual cases, if two
documents have the same canonical form, then the two documents are
logically equivalent within the given application context.  Note that
two documents may have differing canonical forms yet still be
equivalent in a given context based on application-specific
equivalence rules for which no generalized XML specification could
account.

This document is a product of the XML Digital Signatures Working Group
of the IETF.

This memo provides information for the Internet community.  It does
not specify an Internet standard of any kind.  Distribution of this
memo is unlimited.

This announcement is sent to the IETF list and the RFC-DIST list.
Requests to be added to or deleted from the IETF distribution list
should be sent to IETF-REQUEST@IETF.ORG.  Requests to be
added to or deleted from the RFC-DIST distribution list should
be sent to RFC-DIST-REQUEST@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.

Details on obtaining RFCs via FTP or EMAIL may be obtained by sending
an EMAIL message to rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG with the message body 
help: ways_to_get_rfcs.  For example:

        To: rfc-info@RFC-EDITOR.ORG
        Subject: getting rfcs

        help: ways_to_get_rfcs

Requests for special distribution should be addressed to either the
author of the RFC in question, or to RFC-Manager@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Unless
specifically noted otherwise on the RFC itself, all RFCs are for
unlimited distribution.echo 
Submissions for Requests for Comments should be sent to
RFC-EDITOR@RFC-EDITOR.ORG.  Please consult RFC 2223, Instructions to RFC
Authors, for further information.
