


Network Working Group                                          D. Thaler
Internet-Draft                                                 Microsoft
Expires: September 1, 2010                             February 28, 2010


                Issues With Port-Restricted IP Addresses
             draft-thaler-port-restricted-ip-issues-00.txt

Abstract

   This document discusses issues with assigning an IP address to a host
   interface such that the IP address may only be used with a restricted
   set of ports.  This concept is referred to herein as a port-
   restricted IP address.  A number of issues with this concept are
   documented, and the issues are contrasted with other approaches to
   dealing with IPv4 address exhaustion.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 1, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of



Thaler                  Expires September 1, 2010               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft  Issues With Port-Restricted IP Addresses   February 2010


   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  IP Model Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Host Implementation Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  Application/Protocol Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Management Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  Personnel Issues  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   8.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   9.  Conclusion  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   10. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
     10.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
     10.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9




























Thaler                  Expires September 1, 2010               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft  Issues With Port-Restricted IP Addresses   February 2010


1.  Introduction

   In this document we use the term "port-restricted IP address" to mean
   an address assigned to an interface of some device, where that
   address can only be used with a restricted set of port numbers in
   TCP, UDP, and/or other transport protocols.

   Port-restricted IP addresses have been proposed as one mechanism to
   allow address re-use (using disjoint sets of port numbers) among many
   nodes, which is motivated by IPv4 address scarcity.

   A port-restricted IP address differs from other types of shared
   addresses, such as resulting from a classic Network Address
   Translator (NAT) in that a port-restricted IP address is actually
   assigned to an interface of some device.  In contrast, in a typical
   network address translation deployment, a public IPv4 address is
   shared among many hosts by being assigned to an external interface of
   the NAT device (where it is usable with all protocols and ports, and
   hence is not port-restricted).  Each host on the private side of the
   NAT uses a separate, private IPv4 address assigned to its own
   interface, and the private IPv4 address is usable on the private
   subnet with all protocols and ports.

   There are three types of issues with the concept of port-restricted
   IP addresses:
   a.  Issues inherent in any type of address sharing, including Network
       Address Translation (NAT).  These issues are discussed in
       [I-D.ford-shared-addressing-issues] and hence are outside the
       scope of this document.
   b.  Issues that exist in other types of address sharing such as NATs,
       but which are made worse in some way with port-restricted IP
       addresses.
   c.  Issues unique to port-restricted IP addresses.

   This document covers the latter two types of issue.


2.  IP Model Issues

   A "unicast address" is defined (e.g., in [RFC4291]) as an identifier
   for a single interface.  A packet sent to a unicast address is
   delivered to the interface identified by that address.  Many
   protocols, including ARP [RFC0826] [RFC5227] rely on this fact.

   Creating a port-restricted unicast IP address would require a change
   to the above definition so that it could be assigned to multiple
   interfaces (on different hosts) within the address's scope.




Thaler                  Expires September 1, 2010               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft  Issues With Port-Restricted IP Addresses   February 2010


   This change to the IP model would be as big as, but quite different
   from, the introduction of NAT.  This issue is unique to port-
   restricted IP addresses, since in classic NAT, each IP address is
   only assigned to a single interface.

   The closest concept that exists today is that of an "anycast" address
   [RFC1546] [RFC4291].  An anycast address is defined as an identifier
   for a set of interfaces, where a packet sent to an anycast address is
   delivered to the "nearest" interface according to the routing
   protocols' measure of distance.  For additional discussion of anycast
   considerations, see [I-D.iab-anycast-arch-implications].  An anycast
   address differs from a port-restricted IP address in that an anycast
   address may still be used with any protocol or port, and all
   interfaces with the same anycast address are considered equivalent.

   It is also worth noting the distinction between a port-restricted IP
   address, and an address/port obtained from a NAT by an application
   using a protocol such as UPnP or NAT-PMP.  In the UPnP/NAT-PMP model,
   the address is still assigned to the NAT's public interface, not an
   interface of the host on which the application is running.  As such,
   UPnP/NAT-PMP-unaware applications that see addresses of the local
   machine via local APIs (e.g., getsockaddr) will never see such an
   address, and hence no API contract is affected.  Thus, applications
   opt in to use addresses obtained via UPnP or NAT-PMP by writing to
   specific APIs for those protocols.

   A discussion of considerations around changes to the IP model can be
   found in [I-D.iab-ip-model-evolution].  It concludes that any changes
   to the IP model need to be done with extreme care.  Extensions that
   merely add additional optional functionality without impact any
   existing applications (as in the approach UPnP and NAT-PMP took) are
   much safer.

   We must also consider the long-term impact of any change to the IP
   model.  We have learned by experience that there is a consistent
   demand for any IPv4 hacks to also show up in IPv6.  Typically the
   rationale is that once administrators and support personnel are used
   to something, they want to continue to use it, and specifically they
   want it to work the same way in IPv6.  For example, whereas it was
   originally expected that NAT would only ever be deployed for IPv4
   since IPv6 had plenty of address space.  However, recently there has
   been some vocal demand for NAT in IPv6 so that it can work the same
   way.  Hence the key learning is that simply declaring "this hack is
   only for IPv4" does not work.







Thaler                  Expires September 1, 2010               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft  Issues With Port-Restricted IP Addresses   February 2010


3.  Host Implementation Issues

   To actually apply a port restriction, host stack implementations
   would need to change.  Without such a change, a host may naturally
   attempt to use the IP address with arbitrary protocols and ports,
   which would be akin to address spoofing in a port-restricted IP
   address model.

   Even with a modified host stack implementation, applications
   expecting to bind to a specific port number (such as an application
   with an IANA=assigned port number) would fail.  One difference from a
   classic NAT is that in a typical NAT deployment, if an application
   sees that an interface has a global IP address on it, the application
   has no reason to believe there is any restriction on its use.

   One mitigation that has been proposed is to implement a NAT in the
   host kernel.  However, this means that an application cannot
   communicate even with other nodes on the same physical subnet without
   going through the host NAT.  As a result, intra-link communication
   that depends on broadcast, multicast, TTL=1, or transparency (e.g.,
   because of payloads embedding IP addresses) would fail.  In contrast,
   in a classic NAT deployment, communication between two nodes on the
   private side can occur normally.  Hence this issue is specific to
   port-restricted IP addresses.

   Another potential issue with introducing a NAT in the host kernel is
   that if the NAT is done in a way that introduces another hop, the
   topology is thus modified in a way that a user would not expect.  So
   applications and utilities that expose the topology to the user in
   some way will result in user confusion.

   Another host issue with port-restricted IP addresses arises whenever
   multiple interfaces exist that have port-restricted IP addresses with
   disjoint ports.  For example, if an application binds to IN_ADDR_ANY
   for on-link communication, the host stack must pick a port that is
   independent of interface or address.  However, in this case, there is
   no such port, and hence the bind would fail.

   Finally, consider a host roaming between two networks, one of which
   is a typical network today, and the other uses a port-restricted IP
   address.  In this case, an application may have already issued a bind
   (e.g., for UDP) before roaming, and been assigned a port.  After
   roaming, the port would be invalid and there may be no way to inform
   an existing application.  Hence introducing port-restricted IP
   addresses would require changes to many applications, not just host
   stacks.





Thaler                  Expires September 1, 2010               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft  Issues With Port-Restricted IP Addresses   February 2010


4.  Application/Protocol Issues

   One limitation of a port-restricted IP address is that non-port-based
   protocols cannot work.  This is more severe than a classic NAT, since
   with a port-restricted IP address, they cannot be used even within
   the same link, whereas with a classic NAT, private IP addresses can
   still be used with non-port-based protocols between hosts on the
   private side of the NAT.

   In some scenarios, a port-restricted IP address might be designed to
   be assigned to the public side of a classic NAT device.  However,
   this would still result in two issues.  First, the NAT device itself
   would lose the ability to use non-port-based protocols (e.g., the
   ability to respond to IPv4 pings, the ability to support 6to4
   [RFC3056], etc.).  Second, if an end host is connected to the network
   instead of the expected NAT device, unexpected failures would occur.


5.  Management Issues

   ICMP messages that don't embed a packet have no port numbers.  As
   such, they could not be used with port-restricted IP addresses.  With
   some effort, ICMP messages initiated from a port-restricted IP
   address could be made to work, but not ICMP messages (that have no
   embedded packet) destined to such an address.

   Hence there would be no way for a service provider technician to ping
   such an address.  If a port-restricted IPv4 address were used
   alongside a normal IPv6 address, the IPv6 address could be pinged,
   but such a ping would provide no liveness indication of the IPv4
   stack on the destination.  In contrast, ping, traceroute, and similar
   mechanisms today work fine within the area behind a classic NAT.
   Hence this issue is specific to port-restricted IP addresses.

   In addition, the existing IP MIB [RFC4293] surfaces the existing IP
   Model to management applications, and cannot express port-restricted
   IP addresses.  Introducing this concept would require new MIB and
   management tool work.

   Another aspect of management is provisioning.  In order to configure
   an interface with a port-restricted IP address, the network's
   provisioning system would need to evolve.  For example, this may
   involve changes to DHCP, databases, management tools, auditing/
   accounting systems, etc.  These systems are often complex and hence
   their evolution is costly and takes time.

   This issue could be compounded by stateful dynamic port range
   allocation.  In addition, there would be fairness issues resulting



Thaler                  Expires September 1, 2010               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft  Issues With Port-Restricted IP Addresses   February 2010


   from the fact that not all port ranges are of equal value.  For
   example, system ports are often considered more valuable than user
   ports, and ports IANA has assigned to popular protocols/applications
   are more valuable than other ports.


6.  Personnel Issues

   Introducing such a far-reaching change would require retraining
   personnel, such as developers, technical support personnel,
   consultants, and enterprise IT pros.  This training is in addition to
   anything already inherent in address sharing.

   We already understand what fails with NATs and double NATs (since
   many homes are already double NAT-ed today).  Port-restricted IP
   addresses introduce significant complexity with new and hence unknown
   (to existing personnel) failure modes.  This would likely increase
   costs significantly compared to multiple levels of NAT.


7.  Security Considerations

   One mitigation for security attacks against TCP is port randomization
   [I-D.ietf-tsvwg-port-randomization].  Reducing the port space
   available to host thus reduces its ability to randomize ports, and
   hence has negative security implications.  This issue would be made
   worse if there were any port sub-delegation (where sub-ranges are
   allocated out of larger ranges), since each hierarchy level would
   introduce some wasted ports.


8.  IANA Considerations

   This document has no actions for IANA.


9.  Conclusion

   The notion of port-restricted IP addresses would be a drastic change
   to the IP model with far-reaching impact.  The impact would include
   lots of complexity, with many problems known (as enumerated herein)
   and probably more.  In any new and complex change, some people/
   implementations would likely get it wrong or incomplete the first
   time.

   In conclusion, all things considered, the impact of port-restricted
   IP addresses is believed to be worse overall than the impact of
   multiple layers of NAT.  The primary cause of the issues unique to



Thaler                  Expires September 1, 2010               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft  Issues With Port-Restricted IP Addresses   February 2010


   port-restricted IP addresses comes from assigning such an address to
   a device's interface.  This concept does not occur in classic NAT,
   even when used with protocols such as UPnP or NAT-PMP.  It is
   possible that the same state benefits motivating the concept of port-
   restricted IP addresses may be possible in other approaches that do
   not involve assigning a port-restricted IP address to an interface,
   but this investigation is left to other documents.


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC0826]  Plummer, D., "Ethernet Address Resolution Protocol: Or
              converting network protocol addresses to 48.bit Ethernet
              address for transmission on Ethernet hardware", STD 37,
              RFC 826, November 1982.

   [RFC1546]  Partridge, C., Mendez, T., and W. Milliken, "Host
              Anycasting Service", RFC 1546, November 1993.

   [RFC3056]  Carpenter, B. and K. Moore, "Connection of IPv6 Domains
              via IPv4 Clouds", RFC 3056, February 2001.

   [RFC4291]  Hinden, R. and S. Deering, "IP Version 6 Addressing
              Architecture", RFC 4291, February 2006.

   [RFC4293]  Routhier, S., "Management Information Base for the
              Internet Protocol (IP)", RFC 4293, April 2006.

   [RFC5227]  Cheshire, S., "IPv4 Address Conflict Detection", RFC 5227,
              July 2008.

10.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ford-shared-addressing-issues]
              Ford, M., Boucadair, M., Durand, A., Levis, P., and P.
              Roberts, "Issues with IP Address Sharing",
              draft-ford-shared-addressing-issues-01 (work in progress),
              October 2009.

   [I-D.iab-anycast-arch-implications]
              McPherson, D. and D. Oran, "Architectural Considerations
              of IP Anycast", draft-iab-anycast-arch-implications-00
              (work in progress), February 2010.

   [I-D.iab-ip-model-evolution]
              Thaler, D., "Evolution of the IP Model",



Thaler                  Expires September 1, 2010               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft  Issues With Port-Restricted IP Addresses   February 2010


              draft-iab-ip-model-evolution-01 (work in progress),
              November 2008.

   [I-D.ietf-tsvwg-port-randomization]
              Larsen, M. and F. Gont, "Transport Protocol Port
              Randomization Recommendations",
              draft-ietf-tsvwg-port-randomization-06 (work in progress),
              February 2010.


Author's Address

   Dave Thaler
   Microsoft
   One Microsoft Way
   Redmond, WA  98052
   USA

   Phone: +1 425 703 8835
   Email: dthaler@microsoft.com































Thaler                  Expires September 1, 2010               [Page 9]
