BFD Working Group                                        Sami Boutros 
Internet Draft                                         George Swallow        
Intended status: Standards Track                           Nobo Akiya             
Expires: December 2011                                
                                                   Cisco Systems, Inc 
 
                                                           
                                                            June 2011 
                                   

                         BFD over LAG interfaces 


                      draft-boutros-bfd-over-lag-00 


Abstract                                                     

   The Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD) protocol is used to 
   detect faults on interfaces and data links. This document describes 
   a mechanism to run a BFD async session per member link of a Link 
   Aggregation (LAG) interface, BFD would be able to run at a much 
   aggressive rate then Link aggregation control protocol (LACP), and 
   can run in the absence of LACP, and would be able to verify L3 
   connectivity per member link. 

Requirements Language 

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", 
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in 
   this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119]. 

Status of this Memo 

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance 
   with the provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79. 

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet 
   Engineering Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working 
   groups.  Note that other groups may also distribute working 
   documents as Internet-Drafts. 

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six 
   months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other 
   documents at any time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-
   Drafts as reference material or to cite them other than as 
   "work in progress". 

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at 
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt. 


 
Boutros et al.,         Expires December 2011                  [Page 1] 
 
Internet-Draft      draft-boutros-bfd-over-lag-00             June 2011 
 

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed 
   at http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html. 

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 30th, 2011. 

Table of Contents 

   1. Introduction...................................................2 
   2. Bootstrapping BFD sessions per physical member link of a LAG...3 
   3. Scenarios......................................................3 
   3.1. Bootstrapping BFD sessions...................................3 
   3.2. Detecting a Link failure.....................................4 
   4. IANA Considerations............................................4 
   5. Security Considerations........................................4 
   6. References.....................................................5 
   6.1. Normative References.........................................5 
   Full Copyright Statement..........................................5 
   Intellectual Property Statement...................................6 
    

1. Introduction 

   As described in [BFD], the Bidirectional Forwarding Detection (BFD) 
   protocol provides a fast mechanism for detecting communication 
   failures on any data links and the protocol can run over any media 
   and at any protocol layer.  

   Link aggregation as defined in [IEEE 802.1AX] provides mechanisms 
   to combine multiple physical links to a single logical link. The 
   goal is to provide higher bandwidth with the aggregated logical 
   link and better resiliency, since if one of the physical member 
   links fails, the aggregate logical link can continue to forward 
   traffic over the remaining operational physical member links. 

   Currently Link aggregation control protocol (LACP) is used to 
   detect failures on a per physical member link. However, the use of 
   BFD for failure detection would (1) provide a faster detection (2) 
   provide detection in the absence of LACP (3) and would be able to 
   verify L3 connectivity per member link. 

   This document describes how to bootstrap and establish a BFD async 
   session per physical member link of the Link Aggregation (LAG) 
   interface. 

   We propose the use of LSP Ping to bootstrap a BFD session per 
   member link using mechanisms described in [RFC5884]. 


 
Boutros et al.,         Expires December, 2011                 [Page 2] 
 
Internet-Draft      draft-boutros-bfd-over-lag-00             June 2011 
 

2. Bootstrapping BFD sessions per physical member link of a LAG 

   LSP Ping will be used to bootstrap a BFD session per physical LAG 
   member.  

   An LSP Ping Echo Request will be sent per physical member link from 
   the source node to the target node, the request will contain a NIL 
   FEC, and a discriminator TLV. 

   The source node connected to the physical member link of the LAG, 
   would wait to see the BFD packet with the discriminator negotiated, 
   the target node MUST send BFD packets with the negotiated 
   discriminator and the source node MUST reply with BFD packets to 
   bring the BFD Async session up on the same member link it received 
   the BFD packets on. 

   In order to send BFD and LSP Ping packets over the member links 
   prior to L2 and L3 coming up, BFD and LSP Ping IP packets will need 
   to use an address from the 127.x range as a destination address, as 
   well the L2 header to be put on BFD/LSP Ping IP packets could be 
   one of the reserved Multicast MAC addresses defined in the scope of 
   [IEEE .1ad] to be the immediate next hop. 

   BFD and LSP Ping IP packets corresponding to a BFD session on a 
   physical member link will be pre-routed to the member link. 

   If both source and target nodes initiate an LSP Ping Echo request 
   to start a BFD session on a member link, each node MUST use the 
   same discriminator value of the other node in the BFD session on 
   this physical member link, this will make sure that we have one BFD 
   session per member link. 

   LSP Ping may be used for L3 address discovery prior to L3 coming 
   up, since if one side initiate the Echo request with its source 
   address, and 127.x destination address on a given physical member 
   link, the reply coming back on the same physical member link will 
   have the other side source address. 

3. Scenarios 

   Assume 2 nodes A and B are connected via a LAG interface that has 3 
   member links link 1, 2 and 3, further assume that all member links 
   in the LAG interface are active. 

3.1. Bootstrapping BFD sessions  

   Node A will send an LSP Ping Echo request on Link-1, by adding  

 
Boutros et al.,         Expires December, 2011                 [Page 3] 
 
Internet-Draft      draft-boutros-bfd-over-lag-00             June 2011 
 

   1- A NIL FEC. 

   2- Specifying a discriminator value corresponding to Link-1. 

   3- The ip destination address on the packet will be picked from the 
   127.x range. 

   The LSP Ping echo request will then be encaped with a L2 header, by 
   setting the destination mac to one of the reserved Multicast MAC 
   addresses defined in the scope of [IEEE 802.1ad]. 

   Node B receives the LSP Ping Echo request, and may send an Echo 
   reply with its ip address to Node A. 

   Node B starts a BFD session using the negotiated discriminator 
   value in the BFD control packets. B then encapsulates the BFD 
   packets with a L2 header setting the destination mac to one of the 
   reserved Multicast MAC addresses defined in the scope of [IEEE 
   802.1ad]. 

   Once Node A sees the BFD control packets coming on member Link-1, 
   Node A must reply to those BFD control packet on the same member 
   Link-1, negotiation MUST follow the same procedures defined in 
   [BFD] and [BFD-IP]. 

   Node A will then repeat all the above on Link-2 and Link-3, 
   specifying a new discriminator value for each Link. 

    

3.2. Detecting a Link failure 

   In the above scenario assume that Link-2 failed, once BFD detects 
   the failure on both node-A and node-B, each node will update its 
   forwarding table to remove the down link from the aggregation so 
   traffic can follow only on the remaining links 1 and 3. 

4. IANA Considerations 

   TBD 

5. Security Considerations 

   The proposal introduced in this document does not introduce any new 
   security considerations beyond that already apply to the base BFD 
   specification [BFD] and [BFD-IP]. 


 
Boutros et al.,         Expires December, 2011                 [Page 4] 
 
Internet-Draft      draft-boutros-bfd-over-lag-00             June 2011 
 

6. References 

6.1. Normative References 

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate              
   Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997. 

   [BFD] Katz, D. and D. Ward, "Bidirectional Forwarding                  
   Detection", RFC 5880, June 2010. 

   [BFD-IP] Katz, D. and  D. Ward, "Bidirectional Forwarding Detection              
   (BFD) for IPv4 and IPv6 (Single Hop)", RFC 5881, June 2010. 

   [RFC5884] Aggarwal, R. et al., Bidirectional Forwarding Detection 
   (BFD) for MPLS Label Switched Paths (LSPs), RFC 5884, June 2010. 

    

   Authors' Addresses 

   Sami Boutros  
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   Email: sboutros@cisco.com 
    
   George Swallow 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   Email: swallow@cisco.com 
    
   Nobo Akiya 
   Cisco Systems, Inc. 
   Email: nobo@cisco.com 
    
Full Copyright Statement 

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the 
   document authors. All rights reserved. 

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal 
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents 
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of 
   publication of this document. Please review these documents 
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
   respect to this document. Code Components extracted from this 
   document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in 
   Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without 
   warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License. 


 
Boutros et al.,         Expires December, 2011                 [Page 5] 
 
Internet-Draft      draft-boutros-bfd-over-lag-00             June 2011 
 

   All IETF Documents and the information contained therein are 
   provided on an "AS IS" basis and THE CONTRIBUTOR, THE ORGANIZATION 
   HE/SHE REPRESENTS OR IS SPONSORED BY (IF ANY), THE INTERNET 
   SOCIETY, THE IETF TRUST AND THE INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE 
   DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT 
   LIMITED TO ANY WARRANTY THAT THE USE OF THE INFORMATION THEREIN 
   WILL NOT INFRINGE ANY RIGHTS OR ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF 
   MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. 

Intellectual Property Statement 

   The IETF takes no position regarding the validity or scope of any 
   Intellectual Property Rights or other rights that might be claimed 
   to pertain to the implementation or use of the technology described 
   in this document or the extent to which any license under such 
   rights might or might not be available; nor does it represent that 
   it has made any independent effort to identify any such rights. 

   Copies of Intellectual Property disclosures made to the IETF 
   Secretariat and any assurances of licenses to be made available, or 
   the result of an attempt made to obtain a general license or 
   permission for the use of such proprietary rights by implementers 
   or users of this specification can be obtained from the IETF on-
   line IPR repository at http://www.ietf.org/ipr. 

   The IETF invites any interested party to bring to its attention any 
   copyrights, patents or patent applications, or other proprietary 
   rights that may cover technology that may be required to implement 
   any standard or specification contained in an IETF Document.  
   Please address the information to the IETF at ietf-ipr@ietf.org. 

   The definitive version of an IETF Document is that published by, or 
   under the auspices of, the IETF. Versions of IETF Documents that 
   are published by third parties, including those that are translated 
   into other languages, should not be considered to be definitive 
   versions of IETF Documents. The definitive version of these Legal 
   Provisions is that published by, or under the auspices of, the 
   IETF. Versions of these Legal Provisions that are published by 
   third parties, including those that are translated into other 
   languages, should not be considered to be definitive versions of 
   these Legal Provions. 

   For the avoindance od doubt, each Contributor to the UETF Standards 
   Process licenses each Contribution that he or she makes as part of 
   the IETF Standards Process to the IETF Trust pursuant to the 
   provisions of RFC 5378. No language to the contrary, or terms, 
   conditions or rights that differ from or are inconsistent with the 
   rights and licenses granted under RFC 5378, shall have any effect 
 
Boutros et al.,         Expires December, 2011                 [Page 6] 
 
Internet-Draft      draft-boutros-bfd-over-lag-00             June 2011 
 

   and shall be null and void, whether published or posted by such 
   Contributor, or included with or in such Contribution. 

    












































 
Boutros et al.,         Expires December, 2011                 [Page 7] 
 
