 



pppext                                             Jimmy Vincent        
Internet-Draft                                    Nokia Siemens Networks
Intended status:Experimental                        Sanjeev Kumar Sharma
Expires: March 21, 2012                           Nokia Siemens Networks
                                                      September 21, 2011

                           September 21, 2011

                       Priority PPP MMultiplexing
                   draft-jimmy-pppext-priority-mux-00


Status of this Memo

    This document is an Internet Draft. Internet-Drafts are working
    documents of the Internet Engineering   Task Force (IETF), its
    areas, and its working groups. Note that other   groups may also
    distribute working documents as Internet-Drafts.

       Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
    months   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other
    documents at any   time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts
    as reference   material or to cite them other than as "work in
    progress."

       The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at http://
    www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

       The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
     http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

       This Internet-Draft will expire on March 21, 2011.

Copyright Notice

    This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
     provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

     Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
     document authors.  All rights reserved.

     This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
     Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
     (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
     publication of this document.  Please review these documents
     carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with
     respect to this document.  Code Components extracted from this
     document must include Simplified BSD License text as described in
 


Jimmy Vincent, et al.         Experimental                      [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         Priority PPP MMultiplexing     September 21, 2011


     Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without
     warranty as described in the Simplified BSD License.

     Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
     Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
     other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
     Drafts.

Abstract

    PPP multiplexing is a technique to encapsulate and carry multiple
    subframes inside a single PPP superframe as defined in RFC3153. With
    the existing Muxing mechanism, the carrier superframes waits for
    certain time for the incoming frames to be multiplexed, but this
    wait period may have impact on the delay constrains for the
    subframes. On the other hand lesser wait period for superframes so
    as to reduce the delay means lesser multiplexing efficiency.  This
    document describe a method to achive maximum multiplexing efficiency
    for PPP Multiplexing over a link especially during low and medium
    traffic scenarios with out effecting the delay constraints required
    for different types of traffic over that link.

    With priority multiplexing technique delay for real time traffic
    during Multiplexing can be reduced, still assuring maximum
    Multiplexing efficiency

1. Description

    The Priority Multiplexing is implemented by having multiple PPP
    superframe carriers initiated simultaneously towards destination
    node. Each of the superframe waits for incoming subframes to be
    multiplexed until its ready to be transmitted. With this mechanism,
    the waiting period, which is one of stopping criteria of
    multiplexing as defined in RFC 3153, is different for each
    superframe, wait period can be based on delay constraints for each
    sub frame. This method also defines different priorities for each
    subframe type which is inturn based on the traffic it carries. The
    subframe with maximum delay constraint is assigned with highest
    priority. The waiting period of a superframe is as described in RFC
    3153 for PPP multiplexing Section 1.2.

    The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
    "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
    document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [7].

2. Subframe Mux Delay

   This is defined as the amount of time a subframe could spend during
 


Jimmy Vincent, et al.         Experimental                      [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         Priority PPP MMultiplexing     September 21, 2011


   the multiplexing procedure such that there is no impact on the real
   timeness of frame as seen by higher layers which processes this
   subframe. This can also be considered as the extra time due to PPP
   multiplexing procedure.

   Different traffic types has different mux delays based on the delay
   constraints of the traffic it carries. Traffic types having same
   delay constrains has same mux delay and should be considered with
   same subframe mux delay time value.

   Sub frame priority:

   The subframe priority is inversely related to its mux delay, thus
   muxing delay time value inversly indicates the priority of the
   subframe traffic as per the traffic types. Eg: if the subframe is an
   IP packet, then the DSCP field details in IP header which determines
   its priority can be given to the multiplexing module to determine the
   mux delay.

   For each mux delay values of subframes there should be a
   corresponding superframe defined with a wait period(as defined in
   section 3.1) same or less than the mux delay.

3. States of Superframe

   This method defines two states for the superframe at the sender side
   before it is transmitted to the peer.

3.1 Wait State

   When the superframe is created by transmitter,as defined in section
   4.2, it should start in wait state . During this state it waits for
   the subframes for multiplexing.

   Wait Period:

   This is defined by the time superframe is in wait state once it is
   created until it is ready to be transmitted towards peer. During the
   implementation the delay constraints of the of sub frame traffic
   packets types may be used to derive the waiting period of a
   superframe.  For each subframe mux delay value(described in section
   2)defined there must be a superframe wait period determined and one
   superframe is assigned with it, also there should not be any other
   superframes defined with the same wait period.

   However this doesn't mean that subframes with particular subframe mux
   delay is always carried by superframes having the corresponding wait
   period. This superframe wait period just assures that this particular
 


Jimmy Vincent, et al.         Experimental                      [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         Priority PPP MMultiplexing     September 21, 2011


   sub frame traffic type do not wait for more than its mux period
   during multiplexing procedure.

   Remaining wait period:

   This is defined as the time remaining for a superframe to transcends
   into ready state from a particular point of time in wait state. The
   superframe with least remaining wait period must be the next ready to
   be transmitted superframe towards the destination or the next frame
   to enter to ready state.

3.2 Ready State

   If a superframe is met with the stopping criteria of multiplexing as
   defined in RFC3153 section 1.2 then it transcends to ready state from
   wait state.

4. Procedure

   One of the stopping criteria for existing PPP multiplexing
   concatenation mechanism(as described in RFC 3153 for PPP multiplexing
   Section 1.2) is the usage of timer to implement a waiting period for
   the PPP multiplexed frame. This is relevant if the incoming subframes
   are of lesser rate. Limiting this waiting period to lesser values
   could assure that the delay constraints are met for the sub frames,
   but reduces the concatenation capability and in turn the multiplexing
   efficiency. On the other hand if we increase the waiting period for
   the PPP Multiplexed frame for better multiplexing efficiency then
   delay requirements needed for the sub frame types may not be met. The
   priority multiplexing method here assures the delay requirements of
   the sub frame types with better multiplexing efficiency.

   The mechanism described here is only applicable to the sender side
   and have no impact to the receiver, so there is no separate
   negotiations required for this method during NCP setup for
   PPPMultiplexing and is independent whether this method is supported
   at receiver or at sender side.

   The implementation should have certain number of superframes
   initiated at a time towards the destination each of them with
   different wait periods defined, based on the number of mux delays
   defined for the subframes. This means number of waiting period levels
   defined for superframes should be equal to the number of mux delay
   levels defined for subframes.

   The method describes scheduling and transmission procedures.
   Scheduler ensures the waiting period of a subframes to be with a
   certain limit based on its delay requirements. Further the
 


Jimmy Vincent, et al.         Experimental                      [Page 4]

Internet-Draft         Priority PPP MMultiplexing     September 21, 2011


   transmitter procedure ensure that the superframes transmitted are
   multiplexed to maximum possible level thus ensuring maximum muxing
   efficiency.

4.1 Scheduler procedure

   Scheduler determines the superframe for an incoming subframe, to do
   this scheduler determines the subframe-mux delay of incoming
   subframes, based on the mux delay of subframe scheduler multiplexes
   the subframe with a superframe in wait state having a certain
   remaining wait period in such a way that remaining wait period of the
   superframe to which it is multiplexed is always less than or equal to
   the subframe-mux delay for that subframe.

   With this method the superframe for a particular incoming subframe is
   determined such a way that the subframe with highest priority should
   concatenated with the superframes which is latest to be transmitted
   towards destination or the one having the least remaining wait
   period. Also the subframes with next higher level of priority are
   carried in superframes which is next latest to be transmitted and so
   on.

4.2 Transmitter procedure

   Once superframe transcends to ready state, if space still exists for
   more subframes to be multiplexed, then the initial subframes of the
   superframe, which is in wait state, having least remaining wait
   period are re-concatenated to the superframe which is ready to be
   transmitted, thus having maximum multiplexing efficiency. The number
   of subframes thus transferred from the frame having least wait period
   to superframe in ready state depends on the subframe sizes of the
   source superframe and space availability at the target superframe.

   On initiating a re concatenation procedure towards the superframe in
   ready state, if more than one superframe in wait state has the same
   least remaining wait period then it is recommended to take the
   initial subframes of the superframe having least waiting period.

   Once the superframe is transmitted to peer a new superframe with the
   same wait period is initiated.

5. Security Considerations

   This document does not impose additional security considerations
   beyond those that apply to PPP and header-compression schemes over
   PPP.

6. Acknowledgements
 


Jimmy Vincent, et al.         Experimental                      [Page 5]

Internet-Draft         Priority PPP MMultiplexing     September 21, 2011


7. References


   [1] R. Pazhyannur, Ed., "PPP Multiplexing", STD 51, RFC 3153, August
       2001.

   [2] Simpson, W., Ed., "The Point-To-Point Protocol (PPP)", STD 51,
       RFC 1661, July 1994.

   [3] Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
       Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.


8. Author's Addresses

   Jimmy Vincent
   Nokia Siemens Networks
   Bagmane Tech Park, C V Ramannagar
   Bangalore-93
   Karnataka India

   Phone: (+91-080-)42214422

   EMail: jimmy.vincent@nsn.com

   Sanjeev Kumar Sharma
   Nokia Siemens Networks
   Bagmane Tech Park, C V Ramannagar
   Bangalore-93
   Karnataka India

   Phone: (+91-080-)42214310
   EMail: sanjeev.kumar_sharma@nsn.com


















Jimmy Vincent, et al.         Experimental                      [Page 6]
