


P2PSIP Working Group                                             J. Peng
Internet-Draft                                                   L. Deng
Intended status: Standards Track                                   L. Le
Expires: January 3, 2012                                           G. Li
                                                            China Mobile
                                                            July 2, 2011


 Proposals for RELOAD to support Promotion and Demotion for User-owned
                                 Nodes
                     draft-peng-p2psip-promotion-00

Abstract

   This document proposes extensions to RELOAD to support flexible
   client promotion and demotion modes.  RELOAD aims at providing a
   uniform protocol for both overlay clients and peers, where promotion
   of a client to peer is triggered and completed at the client's
   pleasure.  It is proposed that RELOAD provide a more restrictive
   framework to enable passive promotion and demotion, where decisions
   are made by the network rather than individual user-owned nodes.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 3, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents



Peng, et al.             Expires January 3, 2012                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft              RELOAD Promotion                   July 2011


   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
   2.  Terminology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
   3.  Problem Statement  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     3.1.  Passive promotion instead of active promotion  . . . . . .  5
     3.2.  Passive demotion as well as active demotion  . . . . . . .  5
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
   5.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
   6.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   7.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     7.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
     7.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11






























Peng, et al.             Expires January 3, 2012                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft              RELOAD Promotion                   July 2011


1.  Introduction

   RELOAD[I-D.ietf-p2psip-base], a peer-to-peer (P2P) signaling protocol
   for use on the Internet, provides a generic, self-organizing overlay
   network service, allowing nodes to efficiently route messages to
   other nodes and to efficiently store and retrieve data in the
   overlay.

   There are two types of roles in the RELOAD architecture: peer and
   client.  Clients are merely users of the basic messaging and storage
   function provided by the overlay, while peers (i.e. non-client nodes)
   are active participants of the serving overlay as they collaborate in
   a P2P manner to serve one another.

   For Internet services on the basis of a RELOAD-enabled P2P overlay,
   it is appealing to exploit the collectively abundant resources of UNs
   (i.e. user-owned nodes) to further reduce service operator's CAPEX
   (i.e. capital expenses on dedicated serving equipment), thus
   indicating an application scenario for on-demand passive client
   promotion.  On the other hand, due to the distributed nature of P2P
   overlays, undesirable implications often arises after imprudent peer
   exits, demanding for regulated passive peer demotion to client in
   reverse.

   However, unlike normal clients in RELOAD overlay, individual UNs are
   featured with more restrictive resource limits, considerable
   capability heterogeneity, and diverse interest groups, whose
   promotion/demotion demands for more restrictive regulations than the
   simple active client promotion facility defined in RELOAD.

   A SIP usage could be used to illustrate the UN-oriented promotion/
   demotion problem, where a UN-oriented client refers to a user-owned
   node attached originally for SIP UAs, while a peer refers to a
   dedicated SIP servers or UN-promoted SIP servants of the RELOAD
   overlay.

   In this draft, the basic problems for promoting/demoting User-owned
   clients to/from serving peers using the currently available mechanism
   are outlined from the overlay operator's point of view, followed by a
   detailed analysis of specific functionality requirements.  Potential
   extensions to RELOAD are summarized in Section 5.  Relevant security
   considerations are stated in Section 6.









Peng, et al.             Expires January 3, 2012                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft              RELOAD Promotion                   July 2011


2.  Terminology

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].














































Peng, et al.             Expires January 3, 2012                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft              RELOAD Promotion                   July 2011


3.  Problem Statement

3.1.  Passive promotion instead of active promotion

   Since a UN generally lacks the incentive to serve others proactively
   as a result of its relatively bounded resources in combination with
   the autonomous and self-centered nature of its individual owner, the
   UN-oriented promotion procedures are expected to be largely triggered
   from the overlay network side for the benefit of the servicing system
   as a whole.  Restrictive regulations are needed in the passive
   procedure for UN-oriented client promotion.  Firstly, a UN may be
   incapable of or malfunctioning in serving others.  Secondly, a UN may
   be preferred not to become a peer for the sake of network
   considerations, e.g. a moderate network size may be preferred to
   remain efficient overlay routing.

   The simple join-update method allows for active promotion only, where
   an successfully attached client (either UN-oriented or not),
   spontaneously initiates the promotion procedure by sending JoinReq
   messages to expected overlay neighboring peers and indicates its
   ready-to-go status as a serving peer by sending UpdateReq messages
   with revised routing information.

   It is therefore proposed that the promoter (e.g. an overloading peer)
   rather than the UN in question triggers the correspondent passive
   promotion procedure, and the promoted UN is selected from a
   potentially large client group of candidates and certified by the
   promoter to other peers in the overlay to be recognized as an
   authorized peer.

   Potential extensions to RELOAD include extensions to certain kinds of
   messages (e.g.  Probe and Join) in order to support the passive
   client promotion procedure.

3.2.  Passive demotion as well as active demotion

   For a successfully promoted UN peer, one of the following two
   demotion scenarios would ultimately terminates its current peering
   service in the RELOAD overlay.

   o  Active demotion decision from the UN side, that the user/UN
      decides to cease being a peer, for instance:

      *  Case 1: if the user perceives a considerable decrease in user
         experience; or

      *  Case 2: if the UN terminal runs out of battery.




Peng, et al.             Expires January 3, 2012                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft              RELOAD Promotion                   July 2011


   o  Passive demotion decision from the overlay side to get rid of
      unnecessary UN-promoted peers, for instance:

      *  Case 3: Overlay decides to shrinks its peer group to maintain a
         tolerable routing delay;

      *  Case 4: Overlay decides to exclude the peer(s) for
         unsatisfactory service provision.

   The current leave-without-response method fits well in the active
   demotion scenarios, where a peer (either promoted earlier from UN-
   oriented client or not), spontaneously initiates the demotion
   procedure by sending LeaveReq messages to its overlay neighboring
   peers and be free to go without any further confirmation.  This
   simple but kind of abrupt mode is ungracefull in comparison with
   another mode of peer demotion mode (i.e. graceful mode, where the
   demoting peer takes an active part in the data migration and routing
   update for the resultant overlay adaptation before its physical exit.

   It is therefore proposed to add support to allow for both active and
   passive peer demotion procedures for UN-oriented peers.  Moreover,
   graceful demotion mode is highly preferable for passive demotion
   scenarios.

   Potential extensions to RELOAD include extensions to current method
   (e.g. extension to LeaveReq message or may be introduction of new
   types of messages such as explicit LeaveRes messages) to support
   peers graceful demotion mode.























Peng, et al.             Expires January 3, 2012                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft              RELOAD Promotion                   July 2011


4.  Security Considerations

   As stated above, the group of UNs manifests diversity in both
   physical capabilities and public morals in terms of serving as an
   overlay peer.  Hence, it is reasonable to conduct explicit
   authorization to distinguish a promotion candidate's potential to
   serve as a peer from normal UN clients on one hand, and guarantee
   timely revocation to limit the impact of a misbehaving promoted UN-
   oriented peer on the other hand.

   It is therefore proposed that:

   o  a qualified UN acquires a separate peer certificate to attest its
      capabilities and willingness to serve as a peer; and

   o  a UN-promoted peer's certificate is revoked if it fails to deliver
      expected performance while its client certificate remains intact.

   Potential extensions to RELOAD include separate peer certification
   and proactive certificate revocation.































Peng, et al.             Expires January 3, 2012                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft              RELOAD Promotion                   July 2011


5.  IANA Considerations

   There are no IANA considerations associated to this memo.
















































Peng, et al.             Expires January 3, 2012                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft              RELOAD Promotion                   July 2011


6.  Acknowledgements


















































Peng, et al.             Expires January 3, 2012                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft              RELOAD Promotion                   July 2011


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [I-D.ietf-p2psip-base]
              Jennings, C., Lowekamp, B., Rescorla, E., Baset, S., and
              H. Schulzrinne, "REsource LOcation And Discovery (RELOAD)
              Base Protocol", draft-ietf-p2psip-base-15 (work in
              progress), May 2011.

7.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-p2psip-concepts]
              Bryan, D., Matthews, P., Shim, E., Willis, D., and S.
              Dawkins, "Concepts and Terminology for Peer to Peer SIP",
              draft-ietf-p2psip-concepts-03 (work in progress),
              October 2010.































Peng, et al.             Expires January 3, 2012               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft              RELOAD Promotion                   July 2011


Authors' Addresses

   Jin Peng
   China Mobile
   Unit 2, 28 Xuanwumenxi Ave,
   Xuanwu District
   Beijing  100053
   P.R.China

   Email: Penjin@chinamobile.com


   Lingli Deng
   China Mobile
   Unit 2, 28 Xuanwumenxi Ave,
   Xuanwu District
   Beijing  100053
   P.R.China

   Email: Denglingli@chinamobile.com


   Lifeng Le
   China Mobile
   Unit 2, 28 Xuanwumenxi Ave,
   Xuanwu District
   Beijing  100053
   P.R.China

   Email: Lelifeng@chinamobile.com


   Gang Li
   China Mobile
   Unit 2, 28 Xuanwumenxi Ave,
   Xuanwu District
   Beijing  100053
   P.R.China

   Email: Ligangyf@chinamobile.com











Peng, et al.             Expires January 3, 2012               [Page 11]

