


Network Working Group                            Jean-Francois C. Morfin
Internet-Draft                                                   Intlnet
Intended status: Independent submission               September 30, 2009
Expires: March 30, 2010


                 Comments on the IDNA2008 documents set
                   draft-iucg-idna2008-ietf-lc-00.txt

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  This document may contain material
   from IETF Documents or IETF Contributions published or made publicly
   available before November 10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the
   copyright in some of this material may not have granted the IETF
   Trust the right to allow modifications of such material outside the
   IETF Standards Process.  Without obtaining an adequate license from
   the person(s) controlling the copyright in such materials, this
   document may not be modified outside the IETF Standards Process, and
   derivative works of it may not be created outside the IETF Standards
   Process, except to format it for publication as an RFC or to
   translate it into languages other than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 14, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal



Morfin                   Expires March 30, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                IDNA IETF/LC                September 2009


   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.


Abstract

   The IDNA2008 document set is now under IETF/LC. The memo publishes
   the position of the non-WG iucg@ietf.org (Internet User Contributing
   Group) mailing list that its facilitator can neither present nor
   discuss during that Last Call.
   



Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction................................................... 3
   2.  Complementary objectives....................................... 3
   3.  The contribution of these users................................ 3
   4.  IDNAPLUS....................................................... 3
   5.  The Interplus facilitation architecture........................ 4
   6.  Security considerations........................................ 5
   7.  IANA considerations............................................ 5
   8.  References..................................................... 5


Requirements notation

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].



















Morfin                   Expires March 30, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                IDNA IETF/LC                September 2009

1.  Introduction
   
   The discussion on IDNA2008 was followed by several linguistic
   organizations. Among them, French speakers of various origins formed
   a motivated group and rallied the france@large IDN center of
   expertise and received much political and qualified support
   throughout Francophonie. This resulted in a parallel effort to that
   of the Arabic League IDNA list, of an internal list of Microsoft, and
   may be other undisclosed ones.
   
2.  Complementary objectives
   
   This French speakers group first indentified, along with the WG
   Chair, that they had two different yet complimentary objectives.
   While consistency with the rest of the Internet architecture was the
   first thing of interest for the Chair, @larges were first interested
   in facilitating a response to the needs of the users. In the longer
   term, they also were interested in innovation continuity towards the
   Intersem (the semantic and multilingual Internet). However, @larges
   concluded that facilitating a response to user needs was the best way
   to strictly respect and protect the architecture and stability of the
   Internet.
   
3.  The contribution of these users
   
   They, therefore, committed themselves to strictly respect the
   Charter, dedicatedly help the WG process, and further document a 100%
   conformant IDNA2008 extension that responds to their evaluation of
   the users' needs (qualified as ML-DNS, multi-layer DNS). They thereby
   created and maintained the http://wikidna.org site to that end.  The
   @larges, because they are mere Internet lead users, not full-time
   engineers, some misunderstandings followed. With everyone's goodwill,
   the iucg@ietf.org non-WG mailing list has been created and its
   initiators have documented and discussed its charter, by using the
   IDNA debate as a test-bed.  The general IETF mission [RFC3935] is "to
   produce high quality, relevant technical and engineering documents
   that influence the way people design, use, and manage the Internet in
   such a way as to make the Internet work better". The Internet Users
   Contributing Group's intent is for such documents span and
   interoperate within a network external user facilitation area, in
   such a way as to "make the Internet used better". Accordingly, the
   IUCG has a lead user vision of the same Internet architecture that
   should fruitfully complement the IETF engineer vision.
   
4.  IDNAPLUS
   
   This is why the IUCG adheres to the IDNA2008 set of documents, but
   not entirely with their point of view. However, it considers that the
   result is flexible enough to match the way its participants



Morfin                   Expires March 30, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                IDNA IETF/LC                September 2009


   understand the WG charter. Therefore, it produced, as committed, an
   I_D to document its own "IDNAPLUS" proposal.
   http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-iucg-punyplus-02.  This proposal:
   
   *  is a transparent open solution that can accommodate additional
      agents and applications.
      
   *  only concerns the removable introduction of a single additional
      code point (UMI, uppercase metadata indicator), indicating that
      the next code point in an xn--label must be restored in uppercase
      form.
      
   *  is made within the "Interplus" facilitation system framework that
      the IUCG is exploring (plus = plugged layers user system). The
      Interplus context is succinctly introduced in that quoted Draft.

   The IDNA working group @large participants felt that their proposal
   fully belongs to IDNA, could be integrated into IDNA2008, will be
   transparently used by the Registries that need to take into account
   complete case sensitivity and access to new naming services, and for
   an ambient solution to dispose of the pollution of the linguistic
   namespace.
   
5.  The Interplus facilitation architecture
   
   However, they fully understand that the Interplus:
   
   *  intends to address a diversity and new expectations that were not
      supported by the internet legacy.
      
   *  is based on a more extended vision of the existing architecture of
      the Internet that the document on mapping only partly considers.
      
   *  some of thecapabilities of this architecture are of little or no
      use today (classes, presentation, inter-application,
      pseudo-network application, and ubiquity layers) that should be
      examined further.
      
   *  calls for full documentation (that can now be studied and
      produced) and positive IETF and market feedback through community
      full-scale testing.

   Their intention is to continue the study, documentation, and
   development of the Interplus facilitation architecture, and test it
   through three projects for its evaluation and possible
   standardization:
   
   *  Projet.FRA: for a francophone relational space focusing on the
      support of semantic addressing via IDNAPLUS and for the



Morfin                   Expires March 30, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                IDNA IETF/LC                September 2009


      organization of its namespace as the taxonomy of an open ontology.
      
   *  Multilinc: for an open multi-sociolinguistic relational space
      focusing on the multilinguistical issues (multilinguistics is the
      cybernetics of linguistic diversity), relations to norms and
      standards, and mecalanguages.
      
   *  PERFIDES/PERFIDA: technical relational space focusing on personal
      RFID applications, namespace security, privacy protection, and
      IDv6 (IPv6 User ID) related value-added.

6.  Security considerations
   
   There is no direct security consideration.
   
7.  IANA considerations
   
   There is no IANA consideration.
   
8.  References
   
   [RFC2119]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
               Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.
   
   [RFC3935]   Alvestrand, H., "A Mission Statement for the IETF", RFC
               3935, October 2004


Author's address
   
   Jean-Francois C. Morfin
   INTLNET
   23 rue Saint Honore
   Versailles
   78000 Versailles
   France

   Phone: (33.1) 39 50 05 10
   Email: jefsey@jefsey.com
   URI:   http://intlnet.org












Morfin                   Expires March 30, 2010                 [Page 5]

