


Network Working Group                            Jean-Francois C. Morfin
Internet-Draft                                                   Intlnet
Intended status: For information                       February 28, 2012
Expires: August 28, 2012


                       Intelligent Use Task Force
                      draft-iucg-iutf-tasks-00.txt

Abstract

   The Intelligent Use Task Force (IUTF) has responsibility for
   organizing Dedicated Interest Groups (DIG) to research, document and
   validate solutions in the area of Intelligent Use Interfaces (IUI)
   between the various components of the whole digital ecosystem (WDE),
   the resulting intelligent global network (IGNet), the diversity of
   on-line facilitation services that their IUI and IGNet may bring to
   people and machines. This document describes the guidelines and
   procedures for the formation, operations, experimentations and
   publications of IUTF Dedicated Interest Groups and their internal and
   external relations with other SDOs (Standardization and Documentation
   Organizations). Its publication as an IETF Draft is part of the IUCG
   liaison.
   


Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on August 28, 2012.

Copyright Notice




Morfin                   Expires August 28, 2012                [Page 1]
Internet-Draft             Tasks of the IUTF               February 2012


   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.



Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction................................................... 4
       1.1.  IUTF Mission............................................. 4
       1.2.  IUTF Organization........................................ 4
       1.3.  IUTF Stewardship......................................... 5
       1.4.  IUTF participating Members............................... 6
   2.  Terminology.................................................... 6
   3.  The IUTF deliverables.......................................... 6
       3.1.  WISPs.................................................... 7
   4.  IUTF culture................................................... 7
       4.1.  IUTF Ethics.............................................. 7
       4.2.  Multiconsensus........................................... 8
   5.  IUTF Dedicated Interest Groups................................. 9
   6.  DIG Formation................................................. 10
       6.1.  Criteria for formation.................................. 11
       6.2.  Charter................................................. 12
           6.2.1.  Dedicated Interest Group Name..................... 12
           6.2.2.  Chair(s).......................................... 12
           6.2.3.  Online resources (cybship)........................ 12
           6.2.4.  Membership Policy................................. 13
           6.2.5.  Description of Dedicated Interest Group........... 13
   7.  Dedicated Interest Group Operance............................. 13
       7.1.  IUTF Chair.............................................. 14
       7.2.  IUSG Member............................................. 15
       7.3.  Dedicated Interest Group Chair.......................... 15
           7.3.1.  Staff roles....................................... 15
               7.3.1.1.  Ensuring DIG process and content management. 15
               7.3.1.2.  Moderate the DIG email list and wiki........ 15
               7.3.1.3.  Face-to-face and online formal meetings..... 16
           7.3.2.  Communicate the results of meetings............... 16
           7.3.3.  Distribute the work............................... 16
       7.4.  Document development.................................... 16
       7.5.  Document publication.................................... 16



Morfin                   Expires August 28, 2012                [Page 2]
Internet-Draft             Tasks of the IUTF               February 2012


   8.  Dedicated Interest Group Adminance............................ 16
       8.1.  Dedicated Interest Group Editor/Secretary............... 17
       8.2.  Position Clusters....................................... 17
   9.  DIG Revision.................................................. 17
   10.  Specialized Meetings......................................... 18
       10.1.  Meeting planning....................................... 18
       10.2.  Meeting venue.......................................... 18
       10.3.  Meeting management..................................... 19
   11.  Security considerations...................................... 19
       11.1.  Joint Security Reflection.............................. 19
       11.2.  President"s WDE Presentation and Tutorial.............. 19
   12.  IANA considerations.......................................... 20
   13.  Acknowledgments.............................................. 20


Requirements notation

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119].





























Morfin                   Expires August 28, 2012                [Page 3]
Internet-Draft             Tasks of the IUTF               February 2012

1.  Introduction
   
   The IUTF utilizes and co-documents the ALFA model of
   intercommunications in their integrality (MICI) that respects the
   normality as documented in the ISO standards and identifies five main
   strata of human intercommunication in the WDE (whole digital
   ecosystem):
   
   *  interlocutability: use of semiotic protocols: languages, gesture,
      and movements.
      
   *  interconnectibility: basic use of the bandwidth: telephone, TV,
      radio and quantum.
      
   *  interoperationality: value-added use of this bandwidth: such as
      the Internet
      
   *  interintelligibility: extended services of intelligent interface:
      such as the Internet+
      
   *  intercomprehensibility: semantic use of intelligent links: such as
      the Intersem of ideas.
      

   These strata are, or must be, specifically documented as piles of
   independent layers and complementary functions. The IUTF recognizes
   and wish to liaise in each stratum with those organizations that
   cooperate with their standardization, documentation, and stewardship.
   
1.1.  IUTF Mission
   
   The Intelligent Use Task Force (IUTF) has responsibility for
   organizing Dedicated Interest Groups (DIG) to research, document and
   validate solutions in the interintelligibility area of:
   
   *  Intelligent Use Interfaces between the various components of the
      whole digital ecosystem (WDE),
      
   *  the resulting intelligent global network (IGNET),
      
   *  the diversity of facilitation on-line services these IUI and IGNET
      may bring to the people and their machines.
      
1.2.  IUTF Organization
   
   IUTF activities are organized into Dedicated Interest Groups. This



Morfin                   Expires August 28, 2012                [Page 4]
Internet-Draft             Tasks of the IUTF               February 2012


   document describes the guidelines and procedures for the formation,
   operations, experimentations, relations, and publications of IUTF
   Dedicated Interest Groups. It describes the relationship between IUTF
   participants, Dedicated Interest Groups, the Intelligent Use Steering
   Group (IUSG), the IUse Group of Operance, Governance, Constituance
   and Adminance (cf. below) related organizations, and the SDOs of
   other technologies through Intelligent Use Contributing Groups
   (IUCGs).
   
   The basic duties of IUTF participants, including the IUTF Chair,
   Dedicated Interest Group Chairs and IUSG members are defined.
   
   The IUTF is composed of a number of focused, long-term, open
   Dedicated Interest Groups. These groups work on topics related to the
   architecture, protocol, applications, functions and technology of
   Intelligent Use Interfaces between digital technologies, their own
   networking and their underlying meta-data registries system (MDRS).
   Dedicated Interest Groups are expected to have a stable, diversified,
   long term membership of researchers, engineers and lead users.
   Participation is by individual contributors, rather than by
   representatives of organizations.
   
1.3.  IUTF Stewardship
   
   The IUTF is managed by the IUTF Chair in consultation with the
   Intelligent Use Steering Group (IUSG). The IUSG membership includes
   the IUTF Chair, the chairs of the various Dedicated Interest Group
   and possibly other individuals ("members at large") from the IUse
   Group and the IUse community.
   
   The IUTF Chair is co-opted on a yearly and indefinitely renewable
   basis by the IUSG. The Dedicated Interest Group chairs are appointed
   as part of the formation of Dedicated Interest Groups (as detailed
   below) and confirmed or renewed on a yearly basis. The IUSG members
   at large are chosen by the IUTF Chair in consultation with the rest
   of the IUSG.
   
   In addition to managing the Dedicated Interest Groups, the IUSG may
   from time to time hold topical workshops focusing on areas of
   importance to the evolution of the IUI, the IGNET, and the MDRS, or
   more general concertation workshops related to the IGNET and the IUse
   Group gathering the IUSG approved short-term and contractual
   operance, mid-term and international governance, long-term
   technological constituance, and permanent technical adminance
   organizations.
   



Morfin                   Expires August 28, 2012                [Page 5]
Internet-Draft             Tasks of the IUTF               February 2012


1.4.  IUTF participating Members
   
   Except for "members at large" of the IUSG, there is no general
   participation in the IUTF, only individual participation in specific
   Dedicated Interest Groups. The IUTF was initially a branch of the
   Intlnet non-profit association that was created in 1978. It will be
   declared a French non-profit association on its own once its main
   mailing list has reached the threshold of one hundred active
   participants.
   
2.  Terminology
   
   The document uses: "SHALL", "WILL", "MUST" and "REQUIRED" where it
   describes steps in the process that are essential. It uses:
   "SUGGESTED", "SHOULD" and "MAY" where guidelines are described that
   are not essential, but are strongly recommended to help smooth
   Dedicated Interest Group operation. The terms "they", "them" and
   "their" are used in this document as third-person singular pronouns.
   
   This conventional wording will be consistently used throughout the
   IUTF deliverables. The use of "IS/ARE" will reflect those aspects
   that cannot be modified by the IUTF. This includes the ITU and IETF
   "MUST", "SHALL", "WILL", and "REQUIRED", and the "MUST", "SHALL",
   "WILL", and "REQUIRED" of the IUTF when documenting layers above the
   layers that are documented by the ITU and the IETF.
   
3.  The IUTF deliverables
   
   The task of the IUTF is to produce high quality, relevant technical
   and engineering documents, under the form of maintained wiki
   documents (MWD), that will sustain the facilitation of the
   man/machine relations of our "anthrobotical" information and help
   people more adequately design, use, manage and master their digital
   resources.
   
   These MWD will be presented as permanently and consistently
   maintained semantically linked wiki outputs associated to the MDRS
   metadata registries. They will deliver concerted advises, best
   current practices, experimentation reports, information and
   intellition under formally finalized and approved presentations wiki
   documents (MWD), individually introduced and edited IUSG approved
   Individual Wiki Pages (IWP), and on-going IUse working wiki pages
   (IUWW).
   
   The MWD/IWP/MDRS form the technical distributed and duplicable
   referent suite of the Internet+ community. It SHOULD strive to stay



Morfin                   Expires August 28, 2012                [Page 6]
Internet-Draft             Tasks of the IUTF               February 2012


   interoperable with the ISO 3166 and 639 standards and with the IANA
   Registries. MWD/IUWW can be initiated by an individual in a DIG, by a
   DIG as a whole with a designated Editor, or by a position clique
   within a DIG. This last case should be the usual way to start working
   towards a multiconsensus. The designated author(s) need not include
   the group Chair(s).
   
   The review may either be done by the IUTF Chair, the IUSG, or an
   independent reviewer selected by the IUTF Chair. The MWD status will
   be accepted by the IUSG consensus.
   
3.1.  WISPs
   
   IUTF business is carried by mailing lists and supported by Wiki
   Information and Service Pages (WISP). For example, before a meeting,
   a WISP (and appendixes) should publish all relevant documents and
   keep maintained the agenda of meetings, and its minutes a few days
   later on. It will be helpful to provide on-line references for the
   electronic mailing list accompanying possible debate.
   
4.  IUTF culture
   
   Ultimately aiming at the facilitation of intercomprehension, the IUTF
   culture is based upon a distributed multicentric and ubiquitous
   vision of the WDE where every person is the center of his/her
   comprehension of the world and the universe is the dynamic interface
   of all these comprehensions.
   
   It can be summarized as "multiconsensus and living mode" as compared
   with the IETF "rough consensus and running code". The whole challenge
   of the IUCGs as liaisons at the different SDOs will precisely be to
   translate the implications and requirements of this vision at their
   respective layers.
   
4.1.  IUTF Ethics
   
   The IUTF adheres to open standard oriented ethical principles, some
   of which it shares in continuity with the IETF and other SDOs:
   
   *  Open process - any interested person can participate in the work,
      know what is being decided, and make his or her voice heard on the
      issue. Part of this principle is the commitment to making
      documents, DIG mailing lists, Wikis, attendance lists, and meeting
      minutes publicly available online.
      
   *  Technical competence - the issues on which the IUTF delivers are



Morfin                   Expires August 28, 2012                [Page 7]
Internet-Draft             Tasks of the IUTF               February 2012


      issues where the IUTF has the needed competence and that the IUTF
      is willing to listen to technically competent input from any
      source. Technical competence also means that the IUTF output is
      expected to proceed from sound engineering and scientific
      principles, open agorical considerations, and a consistent
      architectony.
      
   *  Volunteer Core - IUTF participants and leadership are to be those
      who come to the IUTF because they want to do work that furthers
      the IUTF's ambition of "making WDE use intelligently facilitated".
      
   *  Multi-consensus and living mode. IUTF propositions are to be based
      on the combined scientist, engineering, and lead user judgment of
      its participants and their real-world experimentation and ongoing
      feedback.
      
   *  Public comments. The public is invited to send comments to the
      wikipage associated talk page and mail address and to participate
      in general discussion on the related DIG mailing list.
      
4.2.  Multiconsensus
   
   The basis for multiconsensus is the need for the interintelligibility
   between different technologies and people logics that is to emerge
   from IUTF debates. It proceeds from what IUTF calls the agoric.
   Where:
   
   *  logic is the rules of reason dealing with information (data that
      were ignored) and the path to formal conclusions,
      
   *  agoric (from Greek agora) is the methods of intelligence dealing
      with intellition (data links that were unknown) and the evolution
      to acceptable emergences.
      

   A multiconsensus is formed when there are different position
   clusters, which demonstrate that they reached an internal
   documentation consensus that is fully understood by the other
   position clusters, and all the position clusters were able to find a
   consensus on the way to document and compare all these positions, and
   on the possibility or the inability to interface them under some
   general or local conditions. The multiconsensus formula permits IUTF
   to simultaneously present seemingly conflicting solutions the sets of
   which may emerge as interoperable and able to support new living
   modes of separated subsidiary operations.
   



Morfin                   Expires August 28, 2012                [Page 8]
Internet-Draft             Tasks of the IUTF               February 2012


   Other areas of application of multiconsensus are:
   
   *  multilinguistics, which is understood as the discipline of the
      cybernetics of the linguistic diversity, considering all the
      languages and cultures as technically and interactively equal in
      people use and applications support.
      
   *  architectonics: facilitated intercomprehension calls for
      cross-referentialization between the facilitating processes. It
      can only be based upon polynymy (synonymy in different languages
      or perceptions). Documenting polynymy demands multiconsensus.
      
   *  experimentation: the IUTF encourages intertesting, i.e. using the
      Internet+ as its own test bed. The purpose of experimentation is
      to review propositions in real life and observe how their agoric
      scales (fom a scaling threshold to the next) in preserving the
      underlying logics or if new rules emerge. A scaling threshold is
      when experimentation shows there is a change due to the scale.
      

   In a more general manner, it is expected that multiconsensus should
   help cross-pollenizing positions and lead to more structured and
   robust emergent architectures protected by their intricate simplicity
   (RFC 3439) from a commercially or politically influenced technical
   bias (cf. RFC 3869).
   
   To be able to consider the largest number of different needs and to
   focus on the interoperability of the proposed solutions through a
   multiconsensus is considered as a necessary IUTF application of the
   precautionary principle: no one has to take the risk of an error in
   trying to speak on behalf of those who are to be interfaced or to
   master the other technologies that are to be interfaced.
   
   More generally, the IUTF will be interested in exploring a theory of
   intellition and agoric systems able to assist in dealing with the
   application of the principle of subsidiarity to its network
   architecture.
   
5.  IUTF Dedicated Interest Groups
   
   The IUTF atom is the Dedicated Interest Group (DIG). Dedicated
   Interest Groups are the activity centers in the IUTF. The leading DIG
   is the IUSG.
   
   IUTF Dedicated Interest Groups are formed to encourage research,
   common work and experimentation, documentation and permanent



Morfin                   Expires August 28, 2012                [Page 9]
Internet-Draft             Tasks of the IUTF               February 2012


   monitoring in areas of importance to the evolution of Intelligent use
   and digital facilitation. Clearly, anyone may conduct such tasks,
   whether or not they are members of a Dedicated Interest Group. The
   expectation is that by sponsoring Dedicated Interest Groups, the IUTF
   can foster cross-organizational concertation, help to create
   "critical mass" in important areas, add to the visibility and impact
   of the work and conclusions, maintain a comprehensive structured
   documentation, and foster adequate operance, maintenance,
   constituance, and adminance cooperation.
   
   IUTF Dedicated Interest Groups may have open or closed memberships.
   Limited membership may be advantageous to the formation of the
   long-term working relationships that are critical to successful
   collaborative research and for time limited experimentation projects.
   However, limited membership must be used with care and sensitivity to
   avoid any unnecessary fragmentation of the work of the research
   community. Allowing limited membership in multiple Dedicated Interest
   Groups working on the same topic may be a way to more easily reach
   multiconsensuses, in particular when the different technologies and
   visions that are involved are well established with different
   objectives that they have to multiconsensually document.
   
   The work of the IUSG is expected to be marked by informality. The
   goal is to encourage and foster valuable contributions by members who
   are engaged in other research, engineering, and business activities,
   and not to add burdensome bureaucracy to the endeavor.
   
6.  DIG Formation
   
   A Dedicated Interest Group is typically created to address a research
   area related to the Intelligent Use of the Whole Digital Ecosystem.
   
   Dedicated Interest Groups have the stable long-term and diversified
   membership that is needed to promote the development of collaboration
   and teamwork in exploring new issues and listening to participating
   or not end users. Participation is by individual contributors, rather
   than by representatives of organizations.
   
   A Dedicated Interest Group may be established at the initiative of an
   individual or group of individuals. Anyone interested in creating an
   IUTF Dedicated Interest Group must submit a charter for the proposed
   group to the IUTF Chair along with a list of proposed founding
   members. The charter will be reviewed by the IUSG after being
   published for comments by the IUse community.
   
   If approved, the charter is placed on the IUTF website and receives



Morfin                   Expires August 28, 2012               [Page 10]
Internet-Draft             Tasks of the IUTF               February 2012


   an IUTF wikipage and talk page and is advised to set-up a mailing
   list.
   
6.1.  Criteria for formation
   
   In determining whether it is appropriate to create a Dedicated
   Interest Group, the IUTF Chair, the IUSG, and the IUse community will
   consider several issues:
   
   *  Is the area that the Dedicated Interest Group plans to address
      clear and relevant for the IUse community?
      
   *  Will the formation of the Dedicated Interest Group foster work
      that would not be done otherwise? Membership drawn from more than
      a single institution, more than a single country, and so on, is to
      be encouraged.
      
   *  Do the Dedicated Interest Group's activities overlap with those of
      another Dedicated Interest Group? If so, it may still be
      appropriate to create the Dedicated Interest Group, but this
      question must be considered carefully since subdividing efforts
      often dilutes the available technical expertise. In such a case, a
      joint Dedicated Interest Group may be created and a common charter
      on the targeted area of a multi-consensus approved.
      
   *  Is there sufficient interest and expertise in the Dedicated
      Interest Group's topic with at least several people willing to
      expend the effort that is likely to produce significant results
      over time? Dedicated Interest Groups require considerable effort,
      including the management of the Dedicated Interest Group process,
      editing of Dedicated Interest Group documents, and contribution to
      the wikipage text.
      

   The IETF/IRTF experience suggests that these roles cannot all be
   handled by one person; at least four or five active participants are
   typically required. To help in this determination, a proposal to
   create a Dedicated Interest Group should include a list of potential
   charter members.
   
   The IUse community review will help determining the proposed
   Dedicated Interest Group overlaps and complementarities with other
   Dedicated Interest Groups or Projected Groups and the consistency
   with the WDE architectony and IUTF architecture.
   
6.2.  Charter



Morfin                   Expires August 28, 2012               [Page 11]
Internet-Draft             Tasks of the IUTF               February 2012

   
   The formation of a Dedicated Interest Group requires a charter, which
   is initially negotiated between a prospective Dedicated Interest
   Group Chair and the IUTF Chair. When the prospective Chair and the
   IUTF Chair are satisfied with the charter form and content, it
   becomes the basis for forming a Dedicated Interest Group.
   
   A charter is a contract between a Dedicated Interest Group and the
   IUTF to conduct research, evaluation, documentation, and monitoring
   in the designated area. Charters may be renegotiated periodically to
   reflect changes to the current status of the art, participants'
   thinking or position clusters, or goals of the Dedicated Interest
   Group.
   
   An IUTF Dedicated Interest Group charter comprises five sections:
   
6.2.1.  Dedicated Interest Group Name
   
   A Dedicated Interest Group name should be reasonably descriptive or
   identifiable. Additionally, the group shall define an acronym
   (maximum 8 printable ASCII characters) to reference the group in the
   IUTF directories, mailing lists, websites, and general documents. The
   name and acronym must not conflict with any IUTF names and acronyms,
   nor - if possible - with IETF, IRTF, W3C, etc. names and acronyms
   unless for cooperation purposes.
   
6.2.2.  Chair(s)
   
   The Dedicated Interest Group may have one or two Chair(s) to perform
   the administrative functions of the group. The IUTF email address(es)
   of the Chair(s) shall be published.
   
6.2.3.  Online resources (cybship)
   
   Each Dedicated Interest Group shall have an address (possibly the
   Chair's) for the members of the Internet community to send queries
   regarding the Dedicated Interest Group. For instance, for requests to
   join the group.
   
   A Dedicated Interest Group, whether limited membership or open, will
   have an "interest" Internet mailing list open to all interested
   parties.
   
   This list is used for an open discussion of the issues and the
   announcements of the results as they become available. Included
   should be the address to which an interested party sends a
   subscription request for the interest list and the procedures to



Morfin                   Expires August 28, 2012               [Page 12]
Internet-Draft             Tasks of the IUTF               February 2012


   follow when subscribing, and the location of the interest mailing
   list archive.
   
   It is expected that a Dedicated Interest Group also has a mailing
   list limited to its members on which a substantial part of the work
   of a Dedicated Interest Group is likely to be conducted via e-mail.
   
6.2.4.  Membership Policy
   
   The Charter must define the membership policy (whether open or
   limited), and the procedure to apply for membership in the group.
   
   While limited membership is permitted, it is in no way encouraged or
   required.
   
6.2.5.  Description of Dedicated Interest Group
   
   The focus and intent of the group shall be set forth briefly. By
   reading this section alone, an individual should be able to decide
   whether this group is relevant to their own work. The first paragraph
   must give a brief summary of the Dedicated Interest area, basis,
   goal(s), and approach(es) planned for the Dedicated Interest Group.
   This paragraph will frequently be used as an overview of the
   Dedicated Interest Group's effort.
   
   To facilitate the evaluation of the intended work and to provide
   ongoing guidance to the Dedicated Interest Group, the charter shall
   describe the proposed research and shall discuss the objectives and
   expected impact with respect to the IUTF architectony and respective
   architecture.
   
7.  Dedicated Interest Group Operance
   
   Dedicated Interest Groups are autonomous and each determines most of
   the details of its own operation with respect to session
   participation, reaching closure, norms of behavior, etc.
   
   During the research phase, the multiconsensus of the group is not
   required. Rather, the measure of success is the quality and impact of
   the research results.
   
   A number of procedural questions and issues will arise over time, and
   it is the function of the Dedicated Interest Group Chair to manage
   the group process, keeping in mind that the overall purpose of the
   group is to make progress towards realizing the Dedicated Interest
   Group's goals and objectives.



Morfin                   Expires August 28, 2012               [Page 13]
Internet-Draft             Tasks of the IUTF               February 2012

   
   There are a few hard and fast rules on organizing or conducting
   Dedicated Interest Group activities, but a set of guidelines and
   practices have evolved over time at IETF and IRTF that have proven
   successful. These external points of experience are listed here, with
   the actual choices that are typically determined by the Dedicated
   Interest Group members and the Chair.
   
7.1.  IUTF Chair
   
   The IUTF Chair is responsible for ensuring that Dedicated Interest
   Groups produce coherent, coordinated, architecturally consistent, and
   timely output as a contribution to the overall evolution of the
   Intelligent Use area.
   
   In addition to the detailed tasks related to Dedicated Interest
   Groups outlined below, the IUTF Chair may also from time to time
   arrange for topical workshops to be attended by the IUSG and perhaps
   other experts in the field.
   
   When required by the situation, in particular during the start-up and
   crisis time, the Chair may unilaterally decide and have his/her
   decisions reviewed when the situation has stabilized. This includes
   the creation of new DIGs.
   
   With the assistance of the IUSG, the IUTF Chair:
   
   *  monitors the range of activities. This may include encouraging the
      formation of Dedicated Interest Groups directly, rather than
      waiting for proposals from IUTF participants.
      
   *  coordinates the work done by the various Dedicated Interest
      Groups.
      
   *  reports on IUTF progress to the IUse community via the IUTF and
      the IUse community wikis.
      
   *  tracks and manages the progress of the various Dedicated Interest
      Groups with the aid of a regular status report on the documents
      and accomplishments from the Dedicated Interest Group Chairs. The
      resulting reports are made available to the community at large at
      regular intervals.
      

   This requires considerable care and feeding, which can be arranged
   through a secretariat organized by the IUSG and benefiting from the
   efforts of those participants filling specific functional roles.



Morfin                   Expires August 28, 2012               [Page 14]
Internet-Draft             Tasks of the IUTF               February 2012

   
7.2.  IUSG Member
   
   Members of the IUSG are responsible for advising the IUTF Chair on
   the chartering of new Dedicated Interest Groups and other matters
   relating to the smooth operation of the IUTF. Dedicated Interest
   Group chairs are members of the IUSG..
   
7.3.  Dedicated Interest Group Chair
   
   The Dedicated Interest Group Chair is concerned with making forward
   progress in the areas under investigation, and has wide discretion in
   the conduct of his Dedicated Interest Group's business. The Chair
   must ensure that a number of tasks are performed, either directly or
   by others assigned to the tasks. This encompasses, at the very least,
   the following:
   
7.3.1.  Staff roles
   
   As for the IUSG, Dedicated Interest Groups require considerable care
   and feeding. In addition to general participation, successful
   Dedicated Interest Groups benefit from the efforts of participants
   filling specific functional roles.
   
7.3.1.1.  Ensuring DIG process and content management
   
   The Chair has the ultimate responsibility for ensuring that a
   Dedicated Interest Group achieves forward progress. For some
   Dedicated Interest Groups, this can be accomplished by having the
   Chair perform all the management-related activities. In other
   Dedicated Interest Groups -- particularly those with large or
   divisive participation -- it is helpful to allocate process and/or
   secretarial functions to other participants. Process management
   pertains strictly to the style of Dedicated Interest Group
   interaction and not to its content. The secretarial function
   encompasses the preparation of minutes, and possibly the editing of
   group-authored documents.
   
7.3.1.2.  Moderate the DIG email list and wiki
   
   The Chair should attempt to ensure that the discussions on this list
   are relevant and that they do not devolve to "flame" attacks or
   rat-hole into technical trivia. The Chair should make sure that
   discussions on the list and updates of the wikipages are summarized
   and that the outcome is well documented (to avoid repetition).
   
7.3.1.3.  Face-to-face and online formal meetings



Morfin                   Expires August 28, 2012               [Page 15]
Internet-Draft             Tasks of the IUTF               February 2012

   
   The Chair should plan and announce meetings well in advance. (See
   section on Meeting Planning for procedures.)
   
7.3.2.  Communicate the results of meetings
   
   The Chair and/or Secretary must ensure that the minutes of a meeting
   are taken and published on the DIG's wiki.
   
7.3.3.  Distribute the work
   
   It is expected that all Dedicated Interest Group participants will
   actively contribute to the work of the group. Dedicated Interest
   Group membership is expected to be a long-term commitment by a set of
   motivated members of the research community. Of course, at any given
   time more of the work is likely to be done by a few participants with
   particular interests, set of skills, and ideas. It is the task of the
   Chair to motivate enough experts to allow for a fair distribution of
   the workload.
   
7.4.  Document development
   
   Dedicated Interest Groups produce documents, and documents need
   authors.
   
   However, the authorship of papers related to the work of a Dedicated
   Interest Group is one of the primary reasons that researchers become
   members and, therefore, finding motivated authors should not be a
   problem.
   
   It is up to the Dedicated Interest Group to decide the authorship of
   papers resulting from Dedicated Interest Group activities. In
   particular, authorship by the entire group is not required.
   
7.5.  Document publication
   
   The Chair and/or Secretary will work with the RFC Editor to ensure
   that documents that are to be published as RFCs conform to the RFC
   publication requirements and to coordinate any editorial changes
   suggested by the RFC Editor.
   
8.  Dedicated Interest Group Adminance
   
   The IUTF adminance is ensured through mailing lists and wiki portals
   and pages. Dedicated Interest Group manages their own set of pages.
   The IUTF directory of (existing and projected) DIGs permits to obtain
   a permanently maintained plex of the digital Intelligent Use area.



Morfin                   Expires August 28, 2012               [Page 16]
Internet-Draft             Tasks of the IUTF               February 2012

   
   This wiki will gather:
   
   *  the charters
      
   *  the IUSW: Stable WikiPage
      
   *  the IUWW: IUse Working Wikipages
      
   *  the IUMW: various types of IU Management Wikipages as listed in
      the Dedicated Interest Group Wikipage.
      
8.1.  Dedicated Interest Group Editor/Secretary
   
   Taking the minutes and editing jointly-authored Dedicated Interest
   Group documents is often performed by a specifically-designated
   participant or set of participants.
   
8.2.  Position Clusters
   
   Multiconsensus is formalized between position clusters. Their
   administration will be organized by a facilitator that is accepted by
   the DIG Chair. They will be allocated wikipages. In order to preserve
   transparency and mutual understanding, it is not advised to create
   cluster mailing lists, except when the amount of work of a cluster or
   the tension between clusters may justify it.
   
9.  DIG Revision
   
   If, at some point, it becomes evident that a Dedicated Interest Group
   is not making progress in the research areas defined in its charter,
   or fails to regularly report the results of its research to the
   community, the IUTF Chair can, in consultation with the Group Chair
   and Members, either:
   
      1. Require that the group recharters to refocus on a different set
      of problems,
      
      2. Request that the group choose (a) new Chair(s),
      
      3. Merge groups, or
      
      4. Disband the group.
      

   If the Dedicated Interest Group, or one of its members, disagrees
   with anIUTF Chair's choice, it/he/she may appeal to the IUSG. If



Morfin                   Expires August 28, 2012               [Page 17]
Internet-Draft             Tasks of the IUTF               February 2012


   it/he/she still disagree with the IUSG response, it/he/she may
   initiate an IUse community controversy to help everyone better
   understand the community expectations. This controversy will be
   closed by a multi-consensus statement of the IUTF Chair, the IUSG,
   and of the Dedicated Interest Group Chair or of the disagreeing
   party. The final decision of the IUTF Chair prevails.
   
10.  Specialized Meetings
   
10.1.  Meeting planning
   
   For coordinated, structured Dedicated Interest Group interactions,
   the Chair must publish to the group mailing list a draft agenda well
   in advance of the actual meeting. The agenda needs to contain at
   least:
   
   *  The items for discussion;
      
   *  The estimated time necessary per item; and
      
   *  A clear indication of what documents the participants will need to
      read before the meeting in order to be well prepared.
      

   A Dedicated Interest Group will conduct much of its business via its
   electronic mail distribution list(s) and wikiset. It is also likely
   to meet periodically to accomplish those things that are better
   achieved in more interactive meetings, such as brainstorming, heated
   altercations, etc. Meetings may be scheduled as a telephone
   conference, a video teleconference, or face-to-face (physical)
   meetings.
   
   It is strongly encouraged that all Dedicated Interest Group meetings
   be recorded in written minutes, to keep those members informed who
   were not present and the community at large and to document the
   proceedings for present and future members. These minutes should
   include the agenda for the meeting, an account of the high points of
   the discussion, and a list of attendees. Unless the Dedicated
   Interest Group chair decides otherwise, the minutes should be sent to
   the interest group and made available through the corresponding
   wikiset.
   
10.2.  Meeting venue
   
   Each Dedicated Interest Group will determine the balance of email and
   face-to-face meetings that is appropriate for making progress on its



Morfin                   Expires August 28, 2012               [Page 18]
Internet-Draft             Tasks of the IUTF               February 2012


   goals.
   
   Electronic mail permits the easiest and most affordable
   participation; face-to-face meetings often enable a better focus,
   more productive debate, and enhanced working relationships.
   
10.3.  Meeting management
   
   The challenge to managing Dedicated Interest Group meetings is to
   balance the need for the consideration of the various issues,
   opinions, and approaches against the need to allow forward progress.
   The Dedicated Interest Group, as a whole, has the final
   responsibility for striking this balance.
   
11.  Security considerations
   
   The IUTF is to help IUsers protect their cybships at the presentation
   stratum mainly through architectural options, and also through
   cultural influence and protocol documentation. For this, it will
   adopt a strong "ethitechnical" approach consisting in influencing the
   architecture, design, and standards in order to retain an ethics,
   security, and privacy respecting use that is technically simpler,
   cheaper, and more rewarding.
   
11.1.  Joint Security Reflection
   
   The Internet+ architectural framework has direct influence on the
   whole digital ecosystem's homeostasis, behavior, stability, etc. and
   on its use. This certainly has impacts on military, industrial,
   economic, and cultural issues. This is why a joint reflection with
   governments and national, business, civil society, international, and
   standardization organizations is undoubtedly necessary. This should
   be organized at the IUSG level.
   
11.2.  President"s WDE Presentation and Tutorial
   
   There is a general agreement that some propositions of law
   demonstrate a deep misunderstanding of the WDE (whole digital
   ecosystem) in general, of the Legacy Internet in particular, and
   certainly of the Internet technology as plainly embodied in the
   Internet+ architectural framework.
   
   There is, therefore, an urgent need for an
   Internet/Internet+/Intersem pedagogical effort towards the education
   of the world's high-level decision makers themselves (not only their
   staff).



Morfin                   Expires August 28, 2012               [Page 19]
Internet-Draft             Tasks of the IUTF               February 2012

   
   The IUTF will, therefore, engage in the preparation and in the
   maintenance of a joint "President's WDE Presentation and Tutorial"
   (PWDEPT), aiming at providing cabinet ministers, law makers, top
   executives, researchers in other disciplines, opinion leaders, and
   press a personal tutorial of reference for comprehending the WDE, its
   main components, mutual interactions, and foreseeable or possible
   incremental, disruptive, and fundamental evolution. A quarterly
   update mail should keep them updated on the technological evolution.
   Online annexes (under a wiki format) should provide the necessary
   references as well as a multilingual glossary.
   
   This PWDEPT should be the result of a multiconsensual work within the
   WSIS IGF framework. It should be planned to be authored in common by
   all the SDOs, governments, Internet providers, civil society,
   chambers of commerce, corporations, associations, societies,
   international organizations, R&D and lead users that would like to
   participate on a neutral information basis. It should be
   multilingual, at least published and maintained in French and
   English, and as much as possible in the main UN languages.
   
   Participants will be provided one page in order to introduce
   themselves and provide clarifications on their own positions. For
   profit participants will be asked to participate in the costs of the
   secretariat and site hosting.
   
12.  IANA considerations
   
   The IUTF model considers five communications strata, which are made
   of their own specialized layers. The principle of a layer is to serve
   the layer above it in using the input received from the layer below
   it, all in accordance with its own rules, protocols, and parameters.
   
   The IUTF respects and uses the IANA as the referent of the Internet
   layers and includes its tables in its own MDRS for internal
   consistency.
   
13.  Acknowledgments
   
   The text of this document heavily draughts on the texts of IETF RFC
   2014 by Abel Weinrib and Jon Postel (IRTF description) and RFC 3935
   (IETF mission) by Harald Alvestrand, the IUTF aiming at reproducing
   their time and success proven working style and organization in a
   manner adapted to its own architectural layers, diversity of
   contributors, interfaced technologies, and particular implication in
   fostering IUse community services.
   



Morfin                   Expires August 28, 2012               [Page 20]
Internet-Draft             Tasks of the IUTF               February 2012



Author's address
   
   Jean-Francois C. Morfin
   INTLNET
   120 chemin des Crouzettes
   Saint-Vincent de Barbeyrargues
   34730 Saint-Vincent de Barbeyrargues
   France

   Phone: (33.9)
   Email: jefsey@jefsey.com
   URI:   http://intlnet.org





































Morfin                   Expires August 28, 2012               [Page 21]
