



Network Working Group                                  C. Camilo Cardona
Internet-Draft                                        P. Pierre Francois
Intended status: Standards Track                          IMDEA Networks
Expires: January 12, 2014                                         S. Ray
                                                                K. Patel
                                                        P. Paolo Lucente
                                                           Cisco Systems
                                                            P. Mohapatra
                                                        Cumulus Networks
                                                           July 11, 2013


                            BGP Path Marking
                       draft-bgp-path-marking-00

Abstract

   The potential advertisement of non-best paths by a BGP speaker
   supporting the add-path or the best-external extensions makes it
   difficult for other BGP speakers to identify the paths that have been
   selected as best by those who advertise them.  This information is
   required for proper operation of some applications.  Towards that
   end, this document proposes marking the paths using extended
   communities that encode the path type.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on January 12, 2014.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.





Camilo Cardona, et al.  Expires January 12, 2014                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft                Path-Marking                     July 2013


   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

   This document may contain material from IETF Documents or IETF
   Contributions published or made publicly available before November
   10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the copyright in some of this
   material may not have granted the IETF Trust the right to allow
   modifications of such material outside the IETF Standards Process.
   Without obtaining an adequate license from the person(s) controlling
   the copyright in such materials, this document may not be modified
   outside the IETF Standards Process, and derivative works of it may
   not be created outside the IETF Standards Process, except to format
   it for publication as an RFC or to translate it into languages other
   than English.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  The BGP Path Type Community . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
   3.  Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   4.  Operational Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   5.  Applications  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     5.1.  Avoiding suboptimal routing in Inter-AS VPN . . . . . . .   7
     5.2.  Monitoring applications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.3.  SDN applications  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     5.4.  Selective Best-path . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   8.  Contributors  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   9.  Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
   10. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     10.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
     10.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  11

1.  Introduction

   When there are multiple paths for a given address prefix, BGP chooses
   one of the paths as the "best-path" according to the best-path
   selection rules prescribed in [RFC4271] and installs the best-path in
   its forwarding table.  Classically, each BGP speaker advertises only



Camilo Cardona, et al.  Expires January 12, 2014                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft                Path-Marking                     July 2013


   the best-path to its peers.  So when a BGP speaker receives a path
   from one of its peers, it is assured that the path is used by the
   peer for forwarding and all other peers have received the same path
   from this peer.  This leads to consistent routing in a BGP network.

   The classical advertisement rule of sending only the best-path does
   not convey the full routing state of a destination present on a BGP
   speaker to its peers.

   o  In order to improve link bandwidth utilization, most BGP
      implementations choose additional paths, that satisfy certain
      conditions, as "multi-path", and install them in the forwarding
      table.  Incoming packets for that destination are load-balanced
      across the best-path and the multi-path(s).  I.e., there may be
      paths installed in the forwarding table that are not advertised to
      the peers.

   o  When an Autonomous System (AS) deploys a route-reflector
      ([RFC4456]) instead of using full IBGP mesh, the BGP speakers
      receive only the route reflector's best-path and therefore lose
      information about the best-paths of other IBGP peers.

   o  If an IBGP path is chosen as the best-path by a non-route-
      reflector BGP speaker, then the best-path is not sent to its IBGP
      peers.  Thus the IBGP peers learn nothing from this BGP speaker
      even though it might have other EBGP paths for that destination.

   o  Even when a BGP speaker selects an EBGP path as the best-path and
      advertises it to its peers, it may have additional EBGP paths for
      the destination.  Should those paths be advertised a priori, they
      could be used by the peers in the event of loss of reachability of
      the best-path resulting in faster convergence.

   There are extensions to the classical BGP advertisement rule to
   provide additional information about the routing state of a
   destination.  A BGP speaker supporting the best-external
   [I-D.ietf-idr-best-external] extension sends its best external path
   to its IBGP peers when the best-path is an IBGP path.  A BGP speaker
   supporting the add-path [I-D.ietf-idr-add-paths] extension advertises
   multiple paths for a given address prefix.

   With best-external or add-path extensions in use, when a BGP speaker
   receives a path from a peer, that path may not be the best-path, or
   it may not be installed in the peer's forwarding table.  In some
   scenarios, knowledge of the path type - i.e., whether the path is the
   best-path, or whether the path is installed in the forwarding table -
   is essential.




Camilo Cardona, et al.  Expires January 12, 2014                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft                Path-Marking                     July 2013


   For instance, in a typical dual-homed VPN in primary-backup
   configuration, the backup path is created by advertising the best-
   external path from the backup PE with worse LOCAL_PREF.  However,
   when the customer adds a site in another AS, the LOCAL_PREF
   information does not reach that site.  As a result, data traffic
   coming from that site may incorrectly be forwarded over the backup
   link instead of the primary link.

   Similarly when an add-path enabled peer receives multiple paths from
   a peer, it does not know which one among those paths is the best-path
   and which ones are installed in the forwarding table.  An exogenous
   monitoring system, e.g., would require that information to properly
   tweak the policies on the router to effect desired forwarding
   optimization.

   This draft proposes marking the advertised paths by an extended
   community, called Path Type community, that encodes the path type.
   The path type provides the necessary information to the BGP speakers
   about how the path is used by the sender when add-path or best-
   external extensions are in use.

2.  The BGP Path Type Community

   The BGP Path Type Community is an IPv4 Address Extended Community
   ([RFC4360]) defined as follows:

   Type Field:

       The value of the high-order octet of the extended Type Field is
       0x01, which indicates that it is transitive.  The value of low-
       order octet of the extended type field for this community is TBD.

   Value Field:

       The Value field contains two sub-fields, described below:

                          +---------------------+
                          | Router-ID (4 octet) |
                          +---------------------+
                          | Path type (2 octet) |
                          +---------------------+



   The Router-ID field contains the BGP identifier of the BGP speaker
   that adds the Path Type community to a path.





Camilo Cardona, et al.  Expires January 12, 2014                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft                Path-Marking                     July 2013


   The Path type field contains a bitfield where each bit encodes a
   specific role of the path.  Multiple bits may be set when a path is
   used in multiple roles.

                      +--------+--------------------+
                      | Value  | Path type          |
                      +--------+--------------------+
                      | 0x0000 | Unknown            |
                      | 0x0001 | Best-path          |
                      | 0x0002 | Best-external path |
                      | 0x0004 | Multi-path         |
                      | 0x0008 | Backup path        |
                      | 0x0010 | Uninstalled path   |
                      | 0x0020 | Unreachable path   |
                      +--------+--------------------+

                         Table 1: Path Type Values

   The best-path is defined in [RFC4271] and the best-external path is
   defined in [I-D.ietf-idr-best-external].

   A multi-path is not the best-path but installed in the forwarding
   table and used for forwarding packets.  We use the convention that
   the best-path is not considered a multi-path.

   A backup path is installed in the forwarding table, but it is not
   used for forwarding until all multipath(s) and the best-path become
   unreachable.  Backup paths are used for fast convergence in the event
   of failures.

   All other reachable paths are marked as 'Uninstalled'.

   Lastly, all paths that are considered unreachable are marked as
   'Unreachable'.  Unreachable paths may be sent only in special cases
   (such as to a monitoring application).

3.  Rules

   o  A BGP speaker MAY add the Path Type community to an originated
      path.

   o  When a BGP speaker receives a path from a peer and propagates it
      without changing the NEXT_HOP to self:

      *  If the path contained a Path Type community, it MUST be
         retained in the propagated path.





Camilo Cardona, et al.  Expires January 12, 2014                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft                Path-Marking                     July 2013


      *  If the path did not contain a Path Type community, the speaker
         MAY add a Path Type community with 'Unknown' value.

   o  When a path received from a peer is propagated after changing the
      NEXT_HOP to self:

      *  If the path did not contain a Path Type community, the Path
         Type community indicating the path role MAY be added.

      *  If the path contained a Path Type community:

         +  If data traffic entering the router for the given
            destination may be forwarded over other paths (e.g., for
            doing load balancing), then the existing Path Type community
            MUST be removed.  The BGP speaker MAY add its own Path Type
            community.

         +  If data traffic entering the router for the given
            destination is forwarded only along the given path, then the
            existing Path Type community MAY be retained.

   In all cases, when a BGP speaker adds its own Path Type community, it
   sets its own router-id in the community.  Note that BGP router-id
   need not be unique across ASes.

   The above rule-set prevents a route reflector from modifying the Path
   Type community set by its client (unless the route reflector is
   changing the NEXT_HOP to self).

   When a peer is capable of sending only one path for a given address
   prefix and it sends the path without any Path Type community, the
   path MAY be considered as the best-path of the peer.  In all other
   cases, a path without any Path Type community SHOULD be considered to
   have an 'Unknown' Path type.

   A local policy might modify the above rules.  For instance, if a
   monitoring application peers with a BGP speaker with add-path
   capability for the sole purpose of learning its paths and their
   types, then the speaker may always add its own Path Type community
   when it advertises the paths to that peer even if it does not change
   the NEXT_HOP to self.  Such overriding policies should be used with
   caution if the advertised paths may impact forwarding decisions in
   the network.

4.  Operational Considerations

   If a speaker receives a path with a Path Type community with an
   invalid combination of bits (e.g., both 'Multi-path' and 'Backup'



Camilo Cardona, et al.  Expires January 12, 2014                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft                Path-Marking                     July 2013


   bits are set), the path MUST NOT be considered invalid.  Such error
   cases SHOULD be logged through other means.

   An implementation SHOULD provide a configurable option for the user
   to indicate whether a path should be readvertised when its type is
   changed.  If the user does not configure the option, the BGP speaker
   MUST NOT readvertise a path just to update its Path Type community
   (e.g., when a path type changes from 'Multi-path' to 'Uninstalled'
   due to a change in IGP metric).

   An implementation SHOULD provide a configurable option for removing
   Path Type communities from paths that are advertised to untrusted
   peers.

   An implementation SHOULD mark all paths for a given address prefix
   consistently.  If one of the paths is marked, then all other paths
   SHOULD be marked.

   An implementation MAY modify its best-path selection algorithm to
   take path type information into account.  For instance, paths with
   type 'Best-path' MAY be preferred over paths of other types.
   Similarly, paths of type 'Best-external' MAY be considered ineligible
   for being a multipath.

5.  Applications

   In this section, we illustrate some applications that benefit from
   the Path Type community proposed in this draft.

5.1.  Avoiding suboptimal routing in Inter-AS VPN

        (RD1)A/B        +---+                     +---+
             LP=200     |RR1|                     |RR2|
               +---+ ,,-+---+-..               _.-+---+-._
              ,|PE1|'           `.            /           \   (RD3)A/B
       +---+,' +---+             +---+   +---+           +---+   -> PE1 (LP=100)
   A/B |CE1|.    |       AS1     |AR1|---|AR2|    AS2    |PE3|   -> PE2 (LP=100)
       +---+ \ +---+             +---+   +---+           +---+
              >|PE2|._         _,'            `.         ,'
               +---+  `-....,-'                 `--...--'
        (RD2)A/B
             LP=150


                      Figure 1: Inter-AS VPN scenario

   Figure 1 depicts an L3VPN network that spans two ASes: AS1 and AS2.
   The ASes may be connected using either Option-B or Option-C



Camilo Cardona, et al.  Expires January 12, 2014                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft                Path-Marking                     July 2013


   techniques [RFC4364].  A customer site with equipment CE1 is dual-
   homed in AS1, connected to PE1 and PE2.  For prefix A/B, the customer
   prefers to use the link between CE1 and PE1.  This routing preference
   is expressed by setting the LOCAL_PREF of the prefix advertised by
   PE1 to a higher value than that of the prefix advertised by PE2.
   This causes PE2 to use PE1's route as the best-path and its own EBGP
   path becomes the best-external path.  PE2 is configured to advertise
   its best-external path.  Therefore, both PEs continue to advertise
   their own EBGP path.  The provider uses unique route-distinguishers
   for its VPNs.  So PE1 and PE2 advertises different VPN prefixes:
   (RD1)A/B and (RD2)A/B. Both these prefixes are advertised to PE3 in
   AS2.  PE3 imports both paths to its own VPN with route-distinguisher
   RD3.

   Existing behavior:

         Since LOCAL_PREF is not sent across AS boundary, both paths on
         PE3 have the default LOCAL_PREF of 100.  As a result the best-
         path selection on PE3 may boil down to tie breaking steps and
         the path towards PE2, which is the best-external path, may be
         chosen.  Alternately, the path from PE2 may be chosen as the
         multipath and may be used for load-balancing.  Therefore, some
         or all data traffic entering PE3 would reach CE1 via PE2, which
         is not what the customer desired.

   Behavior with Path Type Community:

         When PE2 advertises its path, it adds the best-external Path
         Type community.  This community is preserved across AS
         boundary.  If option C is used, then RR1 or RR2 does not change
         the NEXT_HOP and hence the community is preserved according to
         the rule-set (Section 3).  If option B is used, then the
         community reaches AR1 since RR1 does not change the NEXT_HOP.
         At AR1, (RD2)A/B has only one path and forwarding traffic
         entering AR1 from AR2 for this destination (determined by the
         outer label) would use this path.  Therefore, AR1 retains the
         Path Type community set by PE2.  The same applies to AR2.  So
         at PE3, the path to PE2 has the best-external Path Type
         community and therefore PE3 can choose to not use this path for
         forwarding.

   If the best-path algorithm takes the Path Type community values into
   account, it eliminates the need for setting LOCAL_PREF to deprefer
   the bext-external path even within a single AS.  This simplifies the
   network design and management.

   Instead of using Path Type communities, it is possible to use
   policies on the border routers (AR1 and AR2 for option B, or RR1 and



Camilo Cardona, et al.  Expires January 12, 2014                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft                Path-Marking                     July 2013


   RR2 for option C) to recreate the LOCAL_PREF in AS2 (e.g., by
   matching on the RD and the prefix).  However, the recreated
   LOCAL_PREF may interfere with the local policies set in AS2 (e.g., if
   there are other paths in AS2 for A/B that the customer wants to use
   as secondary paths).  In addition, such policies are error-prone and
   complex to manage, especially when the customer is allowed to change
   the primary/backup relationships between PE1 and PE2 on its own.  The
   standardized mechanism of Path Type community is free from such
   drawbacks.

5.2.  Monitoring applications

   A modern Service Provider (SP) network may contain thousands of BGP
   routers.  For planning, proper engineering and operation of a
   backbone, it is a good practice to continuously monitor the routers'
   states and perhaps keep a history.  Many Network Management Systems
   (NMS) establish IBGP sessions with BGP speakers to collect the paths
   the speaker has.  When the speaker supports add-path (or best-
   external), the NMS receives non-best-paths.  There are also
   monitoring protocols such as BMP [I-D.ietf-grow-bmp] that similarly
   receives all paths from a speaker.

   When an NMS receives multiple paths for a destination, it is
   important for its operation to know which path is the best-path,
   which paths are installed in forwarding table, which path is used as
   a backup, etc.  The NMS system may run the best-path algorithm on
   those paths on its own.  However, its information, especially on IGP
   metric, local policies, etc., may be incomplete and hence its own
   calculations may not match that of the router's. It is also noted
   that even if the NMS system collected additional information to run
   the best-path algorithm from the point-of-view of the router, it
   would have to do so for every router in the network, which would
   impose a very high computational burden on the NMS.

   When Path Type community is in use, the router provides the required
   information directly, thus avoiding computational load on the NMS as
   well as potential discrepancies between the point-of-view of the
   router and that of the NMS.

5.3.  SDN applications

   Similar to the monitoring applications, a "Software Defined
   Networking" application monitors the routing state and based on it,
   may change the policies on the router, or inject additional paths, to
   influence the forwarding.  When a BGP speaker supports Path Type
   communities and add-path, an SDN application can simply peer with the
   router to receive its routing state in real-time even if the router
   does not provide vendor-specific APIs for doing the same.



Camilo Cardona, et al.  Expires January 12, 2014                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft                Path-Marking                     July 2013


5.4.  Selective Best-path

   When the classical BGP advertisement rule is followed, all paths a
   BGP speaker considers for best-path are already installed in the
   forwarding table of the peer.  However, when add-path, or best-
   external extensions are used, that no longer holds.  If the BGP
   speakers support the Path Type communities, then the classical
   behavior can be reinstated by considering only those paths in the
   best-path algorithm that are marked as best-path or multi-path.
   Detailed discussions on the rules and benefits of such an approach
   are outside the scope of this draft.

6.  IANA Considerations

   Section 2 defines an IPv4 Address specific transitive extended
   community called the Path Type extended community.  IANA is requested
   to assign a sub-type value for the Path Type extended community.  The
   last 2 bytes of the value field of the Path Type extended community
   contains a bitfield that encodes the type of the advertised path.
   IANA is expected to maintain a registry for these bits.  Section 2
   defines 6 of those bits.  The rest of the bits are to be assigned by
   IANA using the "IETF Consensus" policy defined in [RFC2434].

7.  Security Considerations

   This document introduces no new security concerns to BGP or other
   specifications referenced in this document.

8.  Contributors

   Adam Simpson
   Alcatel-Lucent
   600 March Road
   Ottawa, Ontario K2K 2E6
   Canada
   Email: adam.simpson@alcatel-lucent.com

   Roberto Fragassi
   Alcatel-Lucent
   600 Mountain Avenue
   Murray Hill, New Jersey
   USA
   Email: roberto.fragassi@alcatel-lucent.com

9.  Acknowledgments

   We would like to thank Bruno Decraene for his feedback on this work.




Camilo Cardona, et al.  Expires January 12, 2014               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft                Path-Marking                     July 2013


10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2434]  Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing an
              IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", BCP 26, RFC 2434,
              October 1998.

   [RFC4364]  Rosen, E. and Y. Rekhter, "BGP/MPLS IP Virtual Private
              Networks (VPNs)", RFC 4364, February 2006.

10.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-grow-bmp]
              Scudder, J., Fernando, R., and S. Stuart, "BGP Monitoring
              Protocol", draft-ietf-grow-bmp-07 (work in progress),
              October 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-idr-add-paths]
              Walton, D., Retana, A., Chen, E., and J. Scudder,
              "Advertisement of Multiple Paths in BGP", draft-ietf-idr-
              add-paths-08 (work in progress), December 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-idr-best-external]
              Marques, P., Fernando, R., Chen, E., Mohapatra, P., and H.
              Gredler, "Advertisement of the best external route in
              BGP", draft-ietf-idr-best-external-05 (work in progress),
              January 2012.

   [RFC4271]  Rekhter, Y., Li, T., and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway
              Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, January 2006.

   [RFC4360]  Sangli, S., Tappan, D., and Y. Rekhter, "BGP Extended
              Communities Attribute", RFC 4360, February 2006.

   [RFC4456]  Bates, T., Chen, E., and R. Chandra, "BGP Route
              Reflection: An Alternative to Full Mesh Internal BGP
              (IBGP)", RFC 4456, April 2006.

Authors' Addresses








Camilo Cardona, et al.  Expires January 12, 2014               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft                Path-Marking                     July 2013


   Camilo Cardona
   IMDEA Networks
   Avenida del Mar Mediterraneo
   Leganes  28919
   Spain

   Email: juancamilo.cardona@imdea.org


   Pierre Francois
   IMDEA Networks
   Avenida del Mar Mediterraneo
   Leganes  28919
   Spain

   Email: pierre.francois@imdea.org


   Saikat Ray
   Cisco Systems
   170 W. Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Email: sairay@cisco.com


   Keyur Patel
   Cisco Systems
   170 W. Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Email: keyupate@cisco.com


   Paolo Lucente
   Cisco Systems
   170 W. Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Email: plucente@cisco.com








Camilo Cardona, et al.  Expires January 12, 2014               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft                Path-Marking                     July 2013


   Pradosh Mohapatra
   Cumulus Networks
   140 C. Whisman Rd.
   Mountain View, CA  94041
   USA

   Email: pmohapat@cumulusnetworks.com












































Camilo Cardona, et al.  Expires January 12, 2014               [Page 13]
