
                                                                R. Boldy
Internet Draft                                         Time Warner Cable
Intended status: Standards Track                             May 2, 2013
Expires: November 2, 2013    

             VPLS external Loop Protection Mechanism (VLPM)
                        draft-l2vpn-vlpm-02.txt

Status of this Memo

    This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
    provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

    Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
    Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
    other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
    Drafts.

    Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six
    months and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents
    at any time. It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
    material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

    The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt

    The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
    http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html

    This Internet-Draft will expire on November 13th, 2013.

Copyright Notice

    Copyright (c) 2013 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
    document authors. All rights reserved.

    This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
    Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
    (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
    publication of this document. Please review these documents 
    carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with 
    respect to this document.

    This document may not be modified, and derivative works of it may 
    not be created, except to format it for publication as an RFC or to
    translate it into languages other than English.


   Boldy                 Expires November, 2013                  Page  1

   Internet Draft        draft-l2vpn-vlpm-02.txt

Abstract

    In reference and response to draft-boldy-l2vpn-vplsloop-req-01, 
    this document describes a solution in the form of a protocol 
    function named VPLS External Loop Protection Mechanism (VLPM).

    VLPM is a protocol for a service provider to deploy at the PE to
    detect layer-2 loops in any external layer-2 segments (customer LAN)
    where customer deployed loop prevention methods may have failed.

    After detection of such a loop it facilitates configurable actions 
    to protect the rest of the VPLS Domain from being affected without 
    the need for inter-operation with customer network protocols, other 
    VPLS PEs or sites.

Conventions

    The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
    "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
    document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC 2119]
    when and only when capitalized as shown above.
    Lower case uses of these words are not to be interpreted as carrying
    RFC-2119 significance.

   Boldy                 Expires November, 2013                  Page  2

   Internet Draft        draft-l2vpn-vlpm-02.txt

Table of Contents

   Copyright Notice             ...................................... 1
   Abstract                     ...................................... 2    
   Conventions                  ...................................... 2
   1. Introduction              ...................................... 4
   2. Terminology               ...................................... 4
   3. Method of Operation       ...................................... 5
    3.1. Standard Function                    ........................ 5
    3.2. No-loop-condition behavior           ........................ 6
    3.3. Loop-Present condition behavior      ........................ 6
    3.4. Standard configurable variables      ........................ 6
    3.5. Standard configurable actions        .......................  7
   4. Common Concerns & Backfire              .......................  7
   5. Existing Vendor Function  .....................................  8
   6. Security Considerations   .....................................  8
    7.1. False UPF Injection                  .......................  8
    7.2. UPF Propagation Failure              .......................  9
   8. IANA Considerations          ..................................  9
   9. Acknowledgements          ..................................... 10
   10. References               ..................................... 10
    10.1. Normative References  ..................................... 10
    10.2. Informative References..................................... 10
   11. Author's Address         ..................................... 10


   Boldy                 Expires November, 2013                  Page  3

   Internet Draft        draft-l2vpn-vlpm-02.txt

1. Introduction

    VPLS External Loop Protection Mechanism (VLPM) is an expected 
    function of an MPLS Provider Edge (PE) Router configured with VPLS
    services in line with [RFC4761] and/or [RFC4762].
    Regardless of how physically or logically a VPLS external connection
    is made into a PE, the VPLS instance within each PE builds a per-
    instance MAC-address table much like a physical ethernet switch.

    Unlike a physical ethernet switch or a collection of them the 
    layer-2 broadcast domain of a VPLS instance straddles operational 
    boundaries between the customer and the service-provider.

    This difference, along with vendor configuration variables and
    capability, is what makes the deployment of well-known layer 2 loop
    protection and prevention mechanisms difficult and provides the need
    for VLPM.

2. Terminology

    Herein this document uses the following terminology:

    External Interface:          Any connection into a VPLS instance on
                                 a MPLS Provider Edge (PE) router.

    External layer-2 segment:    The per-customer-site layer-2
                                 broadcast domain that is connected to,
                                 but external of the service provider
                                 controlled VPLS instance.

    External Loop:               A loop that is a layer-2 loop itself
                                 or creates a layer-2 loop within the
                                 external layer-2 segment.

    Loop-Connected-PE:           A PE that has an interface from which
                                 an external loop is present.

    Unknown-Unicast-Probe-Frame: An ethernet frame with a specifically
    (UPF)                        assigned IANA EUI-48 Unicast MAC
                                 address used by VLPM.


   Boldy                 Expires November, 2013                  Page  4

   Internet Draft        draft-l2vpn-vlpm-02.txt

3. Method of Operation

    To meet the requirements stated in draft-boldy-l2vpn-vplsloop-req-01
    VLPM operates in the following method.

3.1. Standard function

    A customer-facing PE MUST send an untagged ethernet frame from every
    external interface within a VPLS instance that is configured for   
    VLPM using the VPLS instance or interface specific configured VLPM  
    parameters.

    Each frame MUST be sourced from the specific external-interface 
    using the BIA MAC-address of that interface and MUST use a fixed,    
    specific destination MAC-address that is defined and allocated by 
    IANA as an EUI-64 unicast MAC-address solely for this function of 
    VLPM.

    This frame is referred to as the VLPM Unknown-Unicast-Probe-Frame   
    or UPF and is expected to be processed and treated as any unknown
    unicast frame within a layer-2 broadcast domain by all devices.

    It is expected and REQUIRED that split-horizon rule is in effect by
    default on all layer-2 devices within the external layer-2 broadcast
    domain - i.e. the frame is flooded to all ports on a device except 
    the ingress port, thus being propagated throughout the entirety of
    the external layer-2 segment.

    Each UPF MUST be generated by the PE at a default, per-interface or
    per-vpls-instance set interval of time. It is expected that the
    required minimum generation rate can be very low ~ 1 Frame Per 
    Second (FPS) but should be configurable. The rate at which an 
    interface sends the UPF correlates to the speed at which a loop can 
    be recognized by VLPM to a certain extent, however past a certain 
    ceiling it is expected to plateau.

   Boldy                 Expires November, 2013                  Page  5

   Internet Draft        draft-l2vpn-vlpm-02.txt

3.2. No-Loop condition behavior

    When no loop is present within the external layer-2 segment the
    following is REQUIRED:

    * The UPF SHOULD propagate through the entirety of the segment
    * The UPF and all copies SHOULD be eventually discarded
    * The PE emanating interface SHALL NOT receive the UPF
    * Other PE interface within the VPLS instance SHALL NOT receive the
            UPF.


3.3. Loop-present condition behavior

    When a loop is present within the external layer-2 segment the
    following is REQUIRED:

    * The UPF SHOULD propagate through the entirety of the segment that 
            is not restricted by the loop.
    * The PE emanating interface SHOULD receive the UPF or a copy of it.
    * Other PE interface within the VPLS instance MAY receive the UPF 
            only if connected to the same logical external layer-2 
            segment where the loop resides, either by design or error.
    * Any PE that is configured for VLPM, and receives a UPF on a VLPM
            active interface, MUST drop the frame after it has been 
            processed by VLPM. A UPF MUST NOT be forwarded within the   
            VPLS instance or locally switched at the PE.

3.4. Standard configurable variables

    The PE interface or VPLS Instance that supports VLPM MUST allow for
    the configuration of the following variables:

    * Frequency of the UPF generation in Frames per second (FPS) between 
            1 and 60. (UPF Generation Frequency).
    * Frequency threshold of UPFs received in order to trigger   
            configured actions. (UPF Trigger Frequency).
    * Source MAC-Address action-list. Either configured on the 
            interface specifically or by means of a reference to a mac-
            access-list.
    * Source MAC-Address ignore-list. Either configured on the 
            interface specifically or by means of a reference to a mac-
            access-list.

    The configurable UPF Trigger Frequency MUST NOT exceed the 
    configured UPF Generation Frequency.
    VLPM MUST NOT be configurable on internally facing virtual VPLS
    interfaces.

   Boldy                 Expires November, 2013                  Page  6

   Internet Draft        draft-l2vpn-vlpm-02.txt

3.5. Standard configurable actions

    The PE interface or VPLS Instance that supports VLPM MUST allow for
    the configuration of the following actions upon receipt of a UPF:

    * No action.
    * Any other allowable configured action only if the source MAC          
            address of the UPF is not in the configured ignore-list.
    * Any other configured action only if the source MAC Address of the
            UPF is included in the configured action-list.
    * Creation of a syslog message.
    * Sending of an SNMP trap message.
    * Disabling MAC address learning in the VPLS instance for the 
            external interface.
    * Discarding all traffic to and from the external interface for a
            configurable hold-time.
    * Disabling flooding of frames received from and to the associated
            interface.
    * Disabling of the associated logical or physical external interface
            requiring manual enabling (e.g. error-disable state)

    These actions MUST be configurable independently of each other and
    in combination with each other where logic permits. For example, it 
    MUST be possible to configure the sending of an SNMP trap, sending a 
    syslog message and disabling the external interface.

4. Common Concerns & Backfire Theory

    Backfire is the technique of setting a smaller, controlled, fire to
    contain a larger wildfire. On the surface this technique of starting 
    a fire to prevent a fire can be seen as strange. In the same way,
    sending of intentional unknown unicast frames into a layer-2 
    broadcast domain that may contain a loop may seem to be counter  
    intuitive on the surface. However, it should be understood in the 
    following context:

    * The expected required and configurable frame-rate of VLPM is very
            low. Under loop condition it is expected that the volume of
            other broadcast, multicast or unknown unicast frames within
            the external layer-2 broadcast domain would vastly outweigh
            any VLPM frames making their negative affect exceedingly
            minimal.

    * The intent of VLPM is to protect the larger VPLS instance and the
            rest of the connected customer network (not the specific
            external layer-2 broadcast segment) from the effects of an
            external loop. To this end VLPM allows for the local segment
            to be restricted or isolated from the larger layer-2 
            broadcast domain. Once restricted or isolated from the VPLS 
            instance the condition of the layer-2 broadcast segment is 
            of no concern to VLPM other than a stable, non-loop 
            condition should exist before the segment is reconnected 
            without restriction into the VPLS instance.

   Boldy                 Expires November, 2013                  Page  7

   Internet Draft        draft-l2vpn-vlpm-02.txt

    * Prevention, resolution and/or specific identification of the cause
            of any loop are outside the scope and purpose of VLPM 
            however restriction or isolation of the layer-2 broadcast 
            segment will make troubleshooting within the segment easier 
            as traffic volume should be reduced to that of only locally 
            sourced frames.

5. Existing Vendor Functions

    At the time of writing there is one proprietary vendor 
    implementation that attempts to address this issue. 
    This feature works by recognizing the learning of a MAC-Address on 
    an interface that is different to an interface on which it was 
    previously learnt. Although useful this feature addresses the issue 
    from a MAC-Learning of customer traffic and is susceptible to 
    false-positives. It also is reliant upon customer traffic and 
    MAC-Learning of all customer frames which VLPM is not.

    There is also a non-vendor written event-script for another Vendor
    router platform that functions in a similar way and thus has similar 
    drawbacks.

6. Security Considerations

    The security considerations for VLPM are as follows:

6.1. False UPF Injection

    Injection of a UPF into the layer-2 broadcast domain from an 
    interface other than the service-provider PE interface would result 
    in a false-positive and unnecessary implementation of the 
    configured action on the PE external interface.

    To mitigate this happening accidentally it is recommended that VLPM
    only be supported on VPLS aware PE devices. To further protect 
    against this and the possibility of malicious injection of such a 
    frame the action-list and ignore-list features provides some 
    basic protection.

    It is possible however for such a malicious frame to be crafted with 
    a spoofed source MAC Address of the PE BIA interface. Such a 
    malicious attack would require knowledge and access to the customer 
    network to an extent that existing best practice security methods 
    should prevent.


   Boldy                 Expires November, 2013                  Page  8

   Internet Draft        draft-l2vpn-vlpm-02.txt

6.2. UPF Propagation Failure

    Under excessive conditions any loop in a layer-2 broadcast domain   
    can result in a device ability to correctly switch traffic   
    including the expected standard behavior of flooding unknown unicast 
    frames. This MAY result in UPFs not being presented back to a VLPM 
    configured interface as expected.

    The functions of UPF generation frequency and UPF trigger frequency
    should be configured with a high level of network congestion in 
    mind.

    Where a device fails and prevents such frames from being able to be
    presented to a VLPM interface, even sporadically, it is expected 
    that this would also prevent all other frames thus rendering VLPM 
    action moot.

7. IANA Considerations

    IANA is requested to assign the registration of a specific EUI-48
    unicast MAC address for use by VLPM as its destination MAC address.
    This document makes no assumptions as to which address will or 
    should be allocation only to point to the following IANA reference 
    that shows available unallocated address space:

    http://www.iana.org/assignments/ethernet-numbers/ethernet-
    numbers.xml

    The requirement is stated as a wholly reserved and specific EUI-48
    unicast mac-address that would allow a frame to be treated, by any
    layer-2 ethernet device, as an unknown unicast frame when used as a
    destination address within an ethernet frame header.

    The need for such an address is detailed as below:

    * To ensure full propagation of the probe frame within any relevant
            broadcast domain segment.
    * To provide a non-hardware specific destination address that 
            clearly identifies the purpose and intent of the VLPM frame 
            for both identification on receipt by PE interfaces 
            configured for VLPM and general network forensic assistance.
    * To ensure that no other protocol or device can legitimately 
            generate a frame using the destination address being watch 
            for by VLPM.
    * To allow for future development of the protocol.


   Boldy                 Expires November, 2013                  Page  9

   Internet Draft        draft-l2vpn-vlpm-02.txt

8. Acknowledgments

    The author wishes to thank the following individuals for their much
    valued review, contribution and/or assistance:

            Michael Damkot
            Lee Howard
            David Gam
	    Stephanie Orsburn

9. References

9.1. Normative References

       [RFC4761]    Rekhter, Y., Kompella, K., "Virtual Private LAN
       Service (VPLS) Using BGP for Auto-Discovery and Signaling", RFC 
       4761,January 2007.

       [RFC4762]    Lasserre, M., Kompella, V., "Virtual Private LAN
       Service (VPLS) Using Label Distribution Protocol (LDP) 
       Signaling", RFC4762, January 2007.

       [RFC 2119] S. Bradner, "Key words for use in RFCs to indicate                 
       requirement levels". 


9.2. Informative References

       [MEF 6.1] Metro Ethernet Forum, Metro Ethernet Services 
       Definitions Phase 2 MEF 6.1, June 2008.

10.   Author's Addresses

       Comments are solicited and should be addressed to the author(s).

       Rich Boldy
       Time Warner Cable
       Email: richard.boldy@twcable.com


   Boldy                 Expires November, 2013                  Page 10
