


GEOPRIV                                                        R. Barnes
Internet-Draft                                               M. Lepinski
Updates: 3693, 3694                                     BBN Technologies
(if approved)                                                  A. Cooper
Intended status: BCP                                           J. Morris
Expires: April 29, 2010                           Center for Democracy &
                                                              Technology
                                                           H. Tschofenig
                                                  Nokia Siemens Networks
                                                          H. Schulzrinne
                                                     Columbia University
                                                        October 26, 2009


     An Architecture for Location and Location Privacy in Internet
                              Applications
                       draft-ietf-geopriv-arch-01

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted to IETF in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.  This document may contain material
   from IETF Documents or IETF Contributions published or made publicly
   available before November 10, 2008.  The person(s) controlling the
   copyright in some of this material may not have granted the IETF
   Trust the right to allow modifications of such material outside the
   IETF Standards Process.  Without obtaining an adequate license from
   the person(s) controlling the copyright in such materials, this
   document may not be modified outside the IETF Standards Process, and
   derivative works of it may not be created outside the IETF Standards
   Process, except to format it for publication as an RFC or to
   translate it into languages other than English.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF), its areas, and its working groups.  Note that
   other groups may also distribute working documents as Internet-
   Drafts.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   The list of current Internet-Drafts can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/ietf/1id-abstracts.txt.

   The list of Internet-Draft Shadow Directories can be accessed at
   http://www.ietf.org/shadow.html.



Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 29, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2009 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents in effect on the date of
   publication of this document (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info).
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.

Abstract

   Location-based services (such as navigation applications, emergency
   services, management of equipment in the field) need geographic
   location information about Internet hosts, their users, and other
   related entities.  These applications need to securely gather and
   transfer location information for location services, and at the same
   time protect the privacy of the individuals involved.  This document
   describes an architecture for privacy-preserving location-based
   services in the Internet, focusing on authorization, security, and
   privacy requirements for the data formats and protocols used by these
   services.


























Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.1.  Binding Rules to Data  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  4
     1.2.  Location-Specific Privacy Risks  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
     1.3.  Privacy Paradigms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
   2.  Overview of the Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  7
     2.1.  Basic Geopriv Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  8
     2.2.  Roles and Data Formats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  9
   3.  The Location Life-Cycle  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
     3.1.  Positioning  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
       3.1.1.  Determination Mechanisms and Protocols . . . . . . . . 13
       3.1.2.  Privacy Considerations for Positioning . . . . . . . . 15
       3.1.3.  Security Considerations for Positioning  . . . . . . . 16
     3.2.  Location Distribution  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
       3.2.1.  Privacy Rules  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
       3.2.2.  Location Configuration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
       3.2.3.  Location References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
       3.2.4.  Privacy Considerations for Distribution  . . . . . . . 20
       3.2.5.  Security Considerations for Distribution . . . . . . . 22
     3.3.  Location Use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
       3.3.1.  Privacy Considerations for Use . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
       3.3.2.  Security Considerations for Use  . . . . . . . . . . . 23
   4.  Security Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
   5.  Example Scenarios  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
     5.1.  Minimal Scenario . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
     5.2.  Location-based Web Services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
     5.3.  Emergency Calling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
     5.4.  Combination of Services  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
   6.  Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
   7.  Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
   8.  IANA Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
   9.  References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
     9.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
     9.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
   Authors' Addresses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38















Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


1.  Introduction

   Location-based services (applications that require information about
   the geographic location of an individual or device) are becoming
   increasingly common on the Internet.  Navigation and direction
   services, emergency services, friend finders, management of equipment
   in the field and many other applications require geographic location
   information about Internet hosts, their users, and other related
   entities.  As the accuracy of location information improves and the
   expense of calculating and obtaining it declines, the distribution
   and use of location information in Internet-based services will
   likely become increasingly pervasive.  Ensuring that location
   information is transmitted and accessed in a secure and privacy-
   protective way is essential to the future success of these services,
   as well as the minimization of the privacy harms that could flow from
   their wide deployment and use.

   Standards for communicating location information over the Internet
   have an important role to play in providing a technical basis for
   privacy and security protection.  This document describes a
   standardized privacy- and security-focused architecture for location-
   based services in the Internet: the Geopriv architecture.  The
   central component of the Geopriv architecture is the location object,
   which is used to convey both location information about an individual
   or device and user-specified privacy rules governing that location
   information.  As location information moves through its life cycle --
   positioning, distribution, and use by its ultimate recipient(s) --
   Geopriv provides mechanisms to secure the integrity and
   confidentiality of location objects and to ensure that location
   information is only transmitted in compliance with the user's privacy
   rules.

   The goals of this document are two-fold: First, the architecture
   described revises and expands on the basic Geopriv Requirements
   [2][3], in order to clarify how these privacy concerns and the
   Geopriv architecture apply to use cases that have arisen since the
   publication of those documents.  Second, this document provides a
   general introduction to Geopriv and Internet location-based services,
   and is useful as a good first document for readers new to Geopriv.

1.1.  Binding Rules to Data

   A central feature of the Geopriv architecture is that location
   information is always bound to privacy rules to ensure that entities
   that receive location are informed of how they may use it.  These
   rules can convey simple directives ("do not share my location with
   others"), or more robust preferences ("allow my spouse to know my
   exact location all of the time, but only allow my boss to know it



Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   during work hours").  By creating a structure to convey the user's
   preferences along with location information, the likelihood that
   those preferences will be honored necessarily increases.  In
   particular, no recipient of the location information can disavow
   knowledge of users' preferences for how their location may be used.
   The binding of privacy rules to location information can convey
   users' desire for and expectations of privacy, which in turn helps to
   bolster social and legal systems' protection of those expectations.

   Binding of usage rules to sensitive information is a common way of
   protecting information.  Several emerging schemes for expressing
   copyright information provide for rules to be transmitted together
   with copyrighted works.  The Creative Commons [21] model is the most
   prominent example, allowing an owner of a work to set four types of
   rules ("Attribution," "Noncommercial," "No Derivative Works" and
   "ShareAlike") governing the subsequent use of the work.  After the
   author sets these rules, the rules are conveyed together with the
   work itself, so that every recipient is aware of the copyright terms.

   Classification systems for controlling sensitive documents within an
   organization are another example.  In these systems, when a document
   is created, it is marked with a classification such as "SECRET" or
   "PROPRIETARY."  Each recipient of the document knows from this
   marking that the document should only be shared with other people who
   are authorized to access documents with that marking.  Classification
   markings can also convey other sorts of rules, such as a
   specification for how long the marking is valid (a declassification
   date).  The United States Department of Defense guidelines for
   classification [4] provides one example.

1.2.  Location-Specific Privacy Risks

   While location-based services raise some privacy concerns that are
   common to all forms of personal information, many of them are
   heightened and others are uniquely applicable in the context of
   location information.

   Location information is frequently generated on or by mobile devices.
   Because individuals often carry their mobile devices with them,
   location data may be collected everywhere and at any time, often
   without user interaction, and it may potentially describe both what a
   person is doing and where he or she is doing it.  For example,
   location data can reveal the fact that an individual was at a
   particular medical clinic at a particular time.  The ubiquity of
   location information may also increase the risks of stalking and
   domestic violence if perpetrators are able to use (or abuse)
   location-based services to gain access to location information about
   their victims.



Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   Location information is also of particular interest to governments
   and law enforcers around the world.  The existence of detailed
   records of individuals' movements should not automatically facilitate
   the ability for governments to track their citizens, but in some
   jurisdictions, laws dictating what government agents must do to
   obtain location data are either non-existent or out-of-date.

1.3.  Privacy Paradigms

   Traditionally, the extent to which data about individuals enjoys
   privacy protections on the Internet has largely been decided by the
   recipients of the data.  Internet users may or may not be aware of
   the privacy practices of the entities with whom they share data.
   Even if they are aware, they have generally been limited to making a
   binary choice between sharing data with a particular entity or not
   sharing it.  Internet users have not historically been granted the
   opportunity to express their own privacy preferences to the
   recipients of their data and to have those preferences honored.

   This paradigm is problematic because the interests of data recipients
   are often not aligned with the interests of data subjects.  While
   both parties may agree that data should be collected, used, disclosed
   and retained as necessary to deliver a particular service to the data
   subject, they may not agree about how the data should otherwise be
   used.  For example, an Internet user may gladly provide his email
   address on a Web site to receive a newsletter, but he may not want
   the Web site to share his email address with marketers, whereas the
   Web site may profit from such sharing.  Neither providing the address
   for both purposes nor deciding not to provide it is an optimal option
   from the Internet user's perspective.

   The Geopriv model departs from this paradigm for privacy protection.
   As explained above, location information can be uniquely sensitive.
   And as siloed location-based services emerge and proliferate, they
   increasingly require standardized protocols for communicating
   location information between services and entities.  Recognizing both
   of these dynamics, Geopriv gives data subjects the ability to express
   their choices with respect to their own location information, rather
   than allowing the recipients of the information to define how it will
   be used.  The combination of heightened privacy risk and the need for
   standardization compelled the Geopriv designers to shift away from
   the prevailing Internet privacy model, instead empowering users to
   express their privacy preferences about the use of their location
   information.

   Geopriv does not, by itself, provide technical means through which it
   can be guaranteed that users' location privacy rules will be honored
   by recipients.  The privacy protections in the Geopriv architecture



Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   are largely provided by virtue of the fact that recipients of
   location are informed of relevant privacy rules, and are expected to
   only use location in accordance with those rules.  The distributed
   nature of the architecture inherently limits the degree to which
   compliance can be guaranteed and verified by technical means.
   Section 4 describes how some security mechanisms can address this to
   a limited extent.

   By binding privacy rules to location information, however, Geopriv
   provides valuable information about users' privacy preferences, so
   that non-technical forces such as legal contracts, governmental
   consumer protection authorities, and marketplace feedback can better
   enforce those privacy preferences.  If a commercial recipient of
   location information, for example, violates the location rules bound
   to the information, the recipient can in a growing number of
   countries be charged with violating consumer or data protection laws.
   In the absence of a binding of rules with location information,
   consumer protection authorities would be less able to protect
   consumers whose location information has been abused.


2.  Overview of the Architecture

   This section provides an overview of the Geopriv architecture for the
   secure and private distribution of location information on the
   Internet.  We describe the three phases of the "location life cycle"
   -- positioning, distribution and use -- and discuss how the
   components of the architecture fit within each phase.  The next
   section provides additional detail about how each phase can be
   achieved in a private and secure manner.

   The risks discussed in the previous section all arise from
   unauthorized disclosure or usage of location information.  Thus, the
   Geopriv architecture has two fundamental privacy goals:

   1.  Ensure that location information is distributed only to
       authorized entities, and

   2.  Provide information to those entities about how they are
       authorized to use the location information.

   If these two goals are met, all parties that receive location
   information will also receive directives about how they can use that
   information.  Privacy-preserving entities will only engage in
   authorized uses, and entities that violate privacy will do so
   knowingly, since they have been informed of what is authorized (and
   thus, implicitly, of what is not).




Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   Privacy rules and their distribution are thus the central technical
   components of the privacy system, since they inform location
   recipients about how they are authorized to use that information.
   The two goals in the preceding paragraph are enabled by two classes
   of rules:

   1.  Access control rules: Rules that describe which entities may
       receive location information and in what form

   2.  Usage rules: Rules that describe what uses of location
       information are authorized

   Within this framework for privacy, security mechanisms provide
   support for the application of privacy rules.  For example,
   authentication mechanisms validate the identities of entities
   requesting location (so that authorization and access-control
   policies can be applied), and confidentiality mechanisms protect
   location information en route between privacy-preserving entities.
   Security mechanisms can also provide assurances that are outside the
   purview of privacy by, for example, assuring location recipients that
   location information has been faithfully transmitted to them by its
   creator.

2.1.  Basic Geopriv Scenario

   As location information is transmitted among Internet hosts, it goes
   through a "location life-cycle": first, the location is computed
   based on some external information (positioning), then it is
   transmitted from one host to another (distribution) until finally it
   is used by a recipient (use).

   For example, suppose Alice is using a mobile device, she learns of
   her location from a wireless location service, and she wishes to
   share her location privately with her friends by way of a presence
   service.  Alice clearly needs to provide the presence server with her
   location and rules about which friends can be provided with her
   location.  To enable Alice's friends to preserve her privacy, they
   need to be provided with privacy rules.  Alice may tell some of her
   friends the rules directly, or she can have the presence server
   provide the rules to her friends when it provides them with her
   location.  In this way, every friend who receives Alice's location is
   authorized by Alice to receive it, and every friend who receives it
   knows the rules.  Good friends will obey the rules.  If a bad friend
   breaks them and Alice finds out, the bad friend cannot claim that he
   was unaware of the rules.

   Some of Alice's friends will be interested in using Alice's location
   only for their own purposes (to meet up with her or plot her location



Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 8]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   over time, for example).  The usage rules that they receive direct
   them as to what they can or cannot do (for example, Alice might not
   want them keeping her location for more than, say, two weeks).

   Consider one friend, Bob, who wants to send Alice's location to some
   of his friends.  To operate in a privacy-protective way, Bob needs
   not only usage rules for himself, but also access control rules that
   describe who he can send information to and rules to give to the
   recipients.  If the rules he received from the presence server
   authorize him to give Alice's location to others, he may do so;
   otherwise, he will require additional rules from Alice before he is
   authorized to distribute her location.  If recipients who receive
   Alice's location from Bob want to distribute the location on further,
   they must go through the same process as Bob.

   The whole example is illustrated in the following figure:

+----------+
| Wireless |
| Location |
| Service  |                           Retrieve
+----------+                       Access Control Rules
     |                      +-----------------------------------+
     |                      | +-----------------------------+   |
  Location                  | |        Access               |   |
     |                      | |     Control Rules           v   |
     |                      | |                            +-----+
     |                      | |                            |     |
     |                      | |                            | Bob |--> ...
     |                      | |                     +----->|     |
     v                      v |                     |      +-----+
 +----------+            +----------+               |
 | |Device| |--Location->| Presence |--Location---->|     +----------+
 | -------- |            | Server   |               |---->| Friend-1 |
 |          |---Rules--->|          |---Rules------>|     +----------+
 |  Alice   |            +----------+               |
 +----------+                                       |
                                                    |     +----------+
                                                    +---->| Friend-2 |
                                                          +----------+

                     Figure 1: Basic Geopriv Scenario

2.2.  Roles and Data Formats

   The above example illustrates the six basic roles in the Geopriv
   architecture:




Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                 [Page 9]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   Target:   An individual or other entity whose location is sought in
      the Geopriv architecture.  In many cases the Target will be the
      human user of a Device, but it can also be an object such as a
      vehicle or shipping container to which a Device is attached.  In
      some instances the Target will be the Device itself.  The Target
      is the entity whose privacy Geopriv seeks to protect.  Alice is
      the Target in Figure 1.

   Device:   The technical device whose location is tracked as a proxy
      for the location of a Target.  Alice's device is the Device in
      Figure 1.

   Rule Maker (RM):   Performs the role of creating rules governing
      access to location information for a Target.  In some cases the
      Target performs the Rule Maker role (as is the case with Alice),
      and in other cases they are separate.  For example, a parent may
      serve as the Rule Maker when the Target is his child, or a
      corporate security officer may serve as the Rule Maker for devices
      owned by the corporation but used by employees.  The Rule Maker is
      also not necessarily the owner of the Device.  For example, a
      corporation may provide a Device to an employee but permit the
      employee to serve as the Rule Maker and set her own privacy rules.

   Location Generator (LG):   Performs the roles of initially
      determining or gathering the location of the Device and providing
      it to Location Servers.  Location Generators may be any sort of
      software or hardware used to obtain the Device's location
      (examples include GPS chips and cellular networks).  A Device may
      even perform the Location Generator role for itself; Devices
      capable of unassisted satellite-based positioning and Devices that
      accept manually entered location information are two examples.
      The wireless location service plays the Location Generator role in
      Figure 1.

   Location Server (LS):   Performs the roles of receiving location
      information and rules, applying the rules to the location
      information to determine what other entities, if any, can receive
      location information, and providing the location to Location
      Recpients.  Location Servers receive location information from
      Location Generators and rules from Rule Makers, and then apply the
      rules to the location information.  Location Servers may not
      necessarily be "servers" in the colloquial sense of hosts in
      remote data centers servicing requests.  Rather, a Location Server
      can be any software or hardware component that distributes
      location information.  Examples include a server in an access
      network, a presence server, or a Web browser or other software
      running on a Device.  The above example includes three Location
      Servers: Alice, the presence service and Bob.



Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 10]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   Location Recipient (LR):   Performs the role of receiving location
      information.  A Location Recipient may ask for location explicitly
      (by sending a query to a Location Server), or it may receive
      location asynchronously.  The presence service, Bob, Friend-1 and
      Friend-2 are Location Recipients in Figure 1.

   In general, these roles may or may not be performed by physically
   separate entities, as demonstrated by the entities in Figure 1, many
   of which perform multiple roles.  It is not uncommon for the same
   entity to perform both the LG and LS roles, or both the LR and LS
   roles.  A single entity may take on multiple roles simply by virtue
   of its own capabilities and the permissions provided to it.

   Although in the above example there is only a single Location
   Generator and a single Rule Maker, in some cases a Location Server
   may receive Location Objects from multiple Location Generators or
   Rules from multiple Rule Makers.  Likewise, a single Location
   Generator may publish location information to multiple Location
   Servers, and a single Location Recipient may receive Location Objects
   from multiple Location Servers.

   There is a close relationship between a Target and its Device.  The
   term "Device" is used when discussing protocol interactions, whereas
   the term "Target" is used when discussing generically the person or
   object being located and its privacy.  While in the example above
   there is a one-to-one relationship between the Target and the Device,
   Geopriv can also be used to convey location information about a
   device that is not directly linked to a single individual or object,
   such as a Device shared by multiple individuals.

   Two data formats are necessary within this architecture:

   Location Object (LO):   An object used to convey location information
      together with Privacy Rules.  Geopriv supports both geodetic
      location data (latitude/longitude/altitude/etc.) and civic
      location data (street/city/state/etc.).  Either or both types of
      location information may be present in a single LO.  Location
      Objects typically include some sort of identifier associated with
      the Target.

   Privacy Rule:   A directive that regulates an entity's activities
      with respect to location information, including the collection,
      use, disclosure, and retention of the location information.
      Privacy Rules describe which entities may obtain location
      information in what form (access control rules) and how location
      information may be used by an entity (usage rules).





Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 11]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   The whole example, using Geopriv roles and formats, is illustrated in
   the following figure:

   +----+
   | LG |
   +----+
     ^
     |
   Positioning
    Data
     |
     |    +------------Privacy Rules------------------>+----+
     |    |                                      +---->| LR |--> ...
     |    |                                      |     | LS |
     v    |                                      |     +----+
   +-------+                                     |
   |Target |                +----+               |     +----+
   |Device |--------------->| LR |---------------+---->| LR |
   |  RM   |       LO       | LS |       LO      |     +----+
   |  LS   |                +----+               |
   +-------+                                     |
                                                 |     +----+
                                                 +---->| LR |
                                                       +----+

                     Figure 2: Basic Geopriv Scenario


3.  The Location Life-Cycle

   The previous section gave an example of how an individual's location
   can be distributed through the Internet.  In general, the location
   life-cycle breaks down into three phases:

   1.  Positioning: A Location Generator determines the Device's
       location.

   2.  Distribution: Location Servers send location to Location
       Recipients, which may in turn act as Location Servers and further
       distribute location to other Location Recipients (possibly
       several times).

   3.  Use: A Location Recipient receives the location and uses it.

   Each of these phases involves a different set of Geopriv roles and
   each has a different set of privacy and security implications.  The
   Geopriv roles are mapped onto the location life-cycle in the figure
   below.



Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 12]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   +----------+                +----------+
   |          |                |  Rule    |+
   |  Device  |                |  Maker(s)||
   |          |                |          ||
   +----------+                +----------+|
        ^|                      +----------+
        || Positioning              | Rules
        || Data                     |
        ||                          |
        |V                          V
   +----------+                +----------+                +----------+
   |Location  |  Location      | Location |+      LO       |Location  |
   |Generator |--------------->| Server(s)||-------------->|Recipient |
   |          |                |          ||               |          |
   +----------+                +----------+|               +----------+
                               +----------+
   <-------------------------><---------------------------><----------->
    Positioning                Distribution                 Use


                       Figure 3: Location Life-Cycle

3.1.  Positioning

   Positioning is the process by which the physical location of the
   Device is computed, based on some observations about the Device's
   situation in the physical world.  (This process goes by several other
   names, including Location Determination or Sighting.)  The input to
   the positioning process is some information about the Device, and the
   outcome is that the Location Generator knows the location of the
   Device.

   In this section, we give a brief taxonomy of current positioning
   systems, their requirements for protocol support, and the privacy and
   security requirements for positioning.

3.1.1.  Determination Mechanisms and Protocols

   While the specific positioning mechanisms that can be applied for a
   given Device are strongly dependent on the physical situation and
   capabilities of the Device, these mechanisms generally fall into the
   three categories described in detail below:

   o  Device-based

   o  Network-based





Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 13]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   o  Network-assisted

   As suggested by the above names, a positioning scheme can rely on the
   Device, an Internet-accessible resource (not necessarily a network
   operator), or a combination of the two.  For a given scheme, the
   nature of this reliance will dictate the protocol mechanisms needed
   to support it.

   With Device-based positioning mechanisms, the Device is capable of
   determining its location by itself.  This is the case for manually-
   entered location or for (unassisted) satellite-based positioning
   (using a Global Navigation Satellite System, or GNSS).  In these
   cases, the Device acts as its own Location Generator, and there are
   no protocols required to support positioning (since no information
   needs to be communicated).

   In network-based positioning schemes, an external Location Generator
   (an Internet host other than the Device) has access to sufficient
   information about the Device, through out-of-band channels, to
   establish the position of the Device.  The most common examples of
   this type of LG are entities that have a physical relationship to the
   Device (such as ISPs).  In wired networks, wiremap-based location is
   a network-based technique; in wireless networks, timing and signal-
   strength based techniques that use measurements from base stations
   are considered to be network-based.  Large-scale IP-to-geo databases
   (for example, those based on WHOIS data or latency measurements) are
   also considered to be network-based positioning mechanisms.

   For network-based positioning as for Device-based, no protocols are
   strictly necessary to support positioning, since positioning
   information is collected outside of the location distribution system
   (at lower layers of the network stack, for example).  This does not
   rule out the use of other Internet protocols (like SNMP) to collect
   inputs to the positioning process.  Rather, since these inputs can
   only be used by certain Location Generators to determine location,
   they are not controlled as private information.  Network-based
   positioning often provides location to protocols by which the network
   informs a Device of its own location (these are known as Location
   Configuration Protocols, see Section 3.2.2 for further discussion).

   Network-assisted systems account for the greatest number and
   diversity of positioning schemes.  In these systems, the work of
   positioning is divided between the Device and an external Location
   Generator via some communication (possibly over the Internet),
   typically in one of two ways:

   o  The Device provides measurements to the LG




Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 14]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   o  The LG provides assistance data to the Device

   "Measurements" are understood to be observations about the Device's
   environment, ranging from wireless signal strengths to the MAC
   address of a first-hop router.  "Assistance" is the complement to
   measurement, namely the information that enables the computation of
   location based on measurements.  A set of wireless base station
   locations (or wireless calibration information) would be an
   assistance datum, as would be a table that maps routers to buildings
   in a corporate campus.

   For example, wireless and wired networks can serve as the basis for
   network-assisted positioning.  In several current 802.11 positioning
   systems, the Device sends measurements (e.g., MAC addresses and
   signal strengths) to a Location Generator, and the Location Generator
   returns a location to the client.  In wired networks, the Device can
   send its MAC address to the Location Generator, which can query the
   MAC-layer infrastructure to determine the switch and port to which
   that MAC address is connected, then query a wire map to determine the
   location at which the wire connected to that port terminates.

   As an aside, the common phrase "assisted GPS" ("assisted GNSS" more
   broadly) actually encompasses techniques that transmit both
   measurements and assistance data.  Systems in which the Device
   provides the Location Generator with GNSS measurements are
   measurement-based, while those in which the assistance server provide
   ephemeris or alamanac data are assistance-based in the above
   terminology.  (Those familiar with GNSS positioning will note that
   there are of course cases in which both of these interactions occur
   within a single location determination protocol, so the categories
   are not mutually exclusive.)

   Naturally, the exchange of measurement or positioning data between
   the Device and the LG requires a protocol over which the information
   is carried.  The structure of this protocol will depend on which of
   the two patterns a network-assisted scheme follows.  Conversely, the
   structure of the protocol will determine which of the two parties
   (the Device, the LG, or both) is aware of the Device's location at
   the end of the protocol interaction.

3.1.2.  Privacy Considerations for Positioning

   Positioning is the first point at which location may be associated
   with a particular Target's identity.  Local identifiers, unlinked
   pseudonyms, or private identifiers that are not linked to the real
   identity of the Target should be used as forms of identity whenever
   possible.  This provides privacy protection by disassociating the
   location from the Target's identity before it is distributed.



Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 15]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   At the conclusion of the positioning process, the entity acting as
   the LG has the Device's location (if the Device is performing the LG
   role, then they both have it).  If the entity acting as the LG also
   performs the role of LS, the privacy considerations in Section 3.2.4
   apply.

   In some deployment scenarios, positioning functions and distribution
   functions may need to be provided by separate entities, in which case
   the LG and LS roles will not be performed by the same entity.  In
   this situation, the LG acts as a "dumb," non-privacy-aware
   positioning resource, and the LS provides the privacy logic necessary
   to support distribution (possibly with multiple LSes using the same
   LG).  In order to allow the privacy-unaware LG to distribute location
   to these LSes while maintaining privacy, the relationship between the
   LG and its set of LSes MUST be tightly constrained, effectively
   "hard-wired."  That is, the LG MUST only provide location to a small
   fixed set of LSes, and each of these LSes MUST comply with the
   requirements of Section 3.2.4.

3.1.3.  Security Considerations for Positioning

   Manipulation of the positioning process can expose location through
   two mechanisms:

   1) A third party could guess or derive measurements about a specific
   device and use them to get the location of that Device.  To mitigate
   this risk, the LG should be able to authenticate and authorize
   devices providing measurements and, if possible, verify that the
   presented measurements are likely to be the actual physical values
   measured by that client.  These security procedures rely on the type
   of positioning being done, and may not be technically feasible in all
   cases.

   2) By eavesdropping, a third party may be able to obtain measurements
   sent by the Device itself that indicate the rough position of the
   Device.  To mitigate this risk, protocols used for positioning must
   provide confidentiality and integrity protections in order to prevent
   observation and modification of transmitted positioning data while en
   route between the Target and the LG.

   If a Location Generator or a Target chooses to act as a Location
   Server, it inherits the security requirements for an LS, described in
   Section 3.2.5.

3.2.  Location Distribution

   When an entity receives location (from an LG or an LS) and
   redistributes it to other entities, it acts as a Location Server.



Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 16]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   Location Distribution is the process by which one or more Location
   Servers provide LOs to Location Recipients in a privacy-preserving
   manner.

   The role of a Location Server is thus two-fold: First, it must
   collect location information and Rules that control access to that
   information.  Rules can be communicated within a Location Object,
   within a protocol that carries LOs, or through a separate protocol
   that carries Rules.  Second, the Location Server must process
   requests for location and apply the Rules to these requests in order
   to determine whether it is authorized to fulfill them by returning
   location information.

   A Location Server thus has at least two types of interactions with
   other hosts, namely receiving and sending Location Objects.  An LS
   may optionally implement a third interaction, allowing Rule Makers to
   provision it with Rules.  The distinction between these two cases is
   important in practice, because it determines whether the LS has a
   direct relationship with a Rule Maker: An LS that accepts Rules
   directly from a Rule Maker has such a relationship, while an LS that
   acquires all its Rules through LOs does not.

3.2.1.  Privacy Rules

   Privacy Rules are the central mechanism in Geopriv for maintaining a
   Target's privacy, because they provide a recipient of a LO (an LS or
   LR) with information on how the LO may be used.

   Throughout the Geopriv architecture, Privacy Rules are communicated
   in rules languages with a defined syntax and semantics.  For example,
   the Common Policy rules language has been defined [5] to provide a
   framework for broad-based rule specifications.  Geopriv Policy [6]
   defines a language for creating location-specific rules.  XCAP [7]
   can be used as a protocol to install rules in both of these formats.

   Privacy Rules follow a default-deny pattern: an empty set of Rules
   implies that all requests for location should be denied (other than
   requests made by the Target itself), with each Rule added to the set
   granting a specific permission.  Adding a Rule to a set can never
   reduce existing permissions; it can only augment them.

   The following are examples of Privacy Rules governing location
   distribution:

   o  Retransmit location when requested from example.com

   o  Retransmit only city and country




Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 17]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   o  Retransmit location with no less than a 100 meter radius of
      uncertainty

   o  Retransmit location only for the next two weeks

   Location Servers enforce Privacy Rules in two ways: by denying
   requests for location, or by transforming the location information
   before retransmitting it.

   Location Servers may also receive Rules governing location retention,
   such as "Retain location only for 48 hours."  Such Rules are simply
   directives about how long the Target's location information can be
   retained.

   Privacy Rules can govern the behavior of both Location Servers and
   Location Recipients.  Rules that direct Location Servers about how to
   treat a Target's location information are known as Local Rules.
   Local Rules are used internally by the Location Server to handle
   requests from Location Recipients.  They are not distributed to
   Location Recipients.

   Forwarded Rules, on the other hand, travel inside LOs and direct
   Location Servers and Location Recipients about how to handle the
   location information they receive.  Because the Rules themselves may
   reveal potentially sensitive information about the Target, only the
   minimal subset of Forwarded Rules necessary to handle the LO is
   distributed.

   An example can illustrate the interaction between Local Rules and
   Forwarded Rules.  Suppose Alice provides the following Local Rules to
   a Location Server:

   o  The LS may retransmit Alice's precise location to Bob, who in turn
      is permitted to retain the location information for one month

   o  The LS may retransmit Alice's city, state, and country to Steve,
      who in turn is permitted to retain the location information for
      one hour

   o  The LS may retransmit Alice's country to a photo-sharing website,
      which in turn is permitted to retain the location information for
      one year and retransmit it to any requesters

   When Steve asks for Alice's location, the Location Server can
   transmit to Steve the limited location information (city, state, and
   country) along with Forwarded Rules instructing Steve to (a) not
   further retransmit Alice's location information, and (b) only retain
   the location information for one hour.  By only sending these



Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 18]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   specifically applicable Forwarded Rules to Steve (as opposed to the
   full set of Local Rules), the LS is protecting Alice's privacy by not
   disclosing to Steve that (for example) Alice allows Bob to obtain
   more precise location information than Alice allows Steve to receive.

   Geopriv is designed to be usable even by devices with constrained
   processing capabilities.  To ensure that Forwarded Rules can be
   processed on constrained devices, LOs are required to carry only a
   limited set of Forwarded Rules, with an option to reference a more
   robust set of external Rules.  The limited Rule set covers two
   privacy aspects: how long the Target's location may be retained
   ("Retention"), and whether or not the Target's location may be
   retransmitted ("Retransmission").  A LO may contain a pointer to more
   robust Rules, such as those shown in the set of four Rules at the
   beginning of this section.

3.2.2.  Location Configuration

   Some performing the Location Generator role are designed only to
   provide Targets with their own locations (as opposed to distributing
   a Target's location to others).  The process of providing a Target
   with its own location is known within Geopriv as Location
   Configuration.  The term Location Information Server (LIS) is often
   used to describe the entity that performs this function (although a
   LIS may also perform other functions, such as providing a Target's
   location to other entities).

   A Location Configuration Protocol (LCP) [8] is one mechanism that can
   be used by a Device to discover its own location from a LIS.  LCPs
   provide functions in the way they obtain, transport and deliver
   location requests and responses between a LIS and a Device such that
   the LIS can trust that the location requests and responses handled
   via the LCP are in fact from/to the Target.  Several LCPs have been
   developed within Geopriv [9][10][11][12].

   A LIS whose sole purpose is to perform Location Configuration need
   only follow a simple privacy-preserving policy: transmit a Target's
   location only to the Target itself.  This is known as the "LCP
   policy."

   Importantly, if an LS is also serving in the role of LG and it has
   not been provisioned with Privacy Rules for a particular Target, it
   MUST follow the LCP policy, whether it is a LIS or not.  In the
   positioning phase, an entity serving the roles of both LG and LS that
   has not received Privacy Rules must follow this policy.  The same is
   true for any LS in the distribution phase.





Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 19]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


3.2.3.  Location References

   The location distribution process occurs through a series of
   transmissions of Location Objects: transmissions of location "by
   value."  Location "by value" can be expressed in terms of geodetic
   location data (latitude/longitude/altitude/etc.) and civic location
   data (street/city/state/etc.).

   Location can also be distributed "by reference," where a reference is
   represented by a URI that can be dereferenced to obtain the LO.  This
   document summarizes the properties of location-by-reference that are
   discussed at length in [13].

   Distribution of location by reference (distribution of location URIs)
   offer several benefits.  Location URIs are a more compact way of
   transmitting location, since URIs are usually smaller than LOs.  A
   recipient of location can make multiple requests to a URI over time
   to receive updated location (if the URI is configured to provide
   fresh location rather than a single "snapshot").

   From a positioning perspective, location by reference can offer the
   additional benefit of "just in time" positioning.  If location is
   distributed by reference, an entity acting as a combined LG/LS only
   needs to perform positioning operations when a recipient dereferences
   a previously distributed URI.

   From a privacy perspective, distributing location as a URI instead of
   as a Location Object can help protect privacy by forcing each
   recipient of the location to request location from the referenced LS,
   which can then apply access controls individually to each recipient.
   But the benefit provided here is contingent on the LS applying access
   controls.  If the LS does not apply an access control policy to
   requests for a location URI (in other words, if it enforces the
   "possession model" defined in [13]), then transmitting a location URI
   presents the same privacy risks as transmitting the Location Object
   itself.  Moreover, the use of location URIs without access controls
   can introduce additional privacy risks: If URIs predictable, an
   attacker to whom the URI has not been sent may be able to guess the
   URI and use it to obtain the referenced LO.  To mitigate this,
   location URIs without access controls need to be constructed so that
   they contain a random component with sufficient entropy to make
   guessing infeasible.

3.2.4.  Privacy Considerations for Distribution

   Location information MUST be accompanied by Rules throughout the
   distribution process.  Otherwise, a recipient will not know what uses
   are authorized, and will not be able to use the LO.  Consequently,



Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 20]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   LOs MUST be able to express Rules that convey appropriate
   authorizations.

   An LS MUST only accept Rules from authorized Rule Makers.  For an LS
   that receives Rules exclusively in LOs and has no direct relationship
   with a Rule Maker, this requirement is met by applying the Rules
   provided in a LO to the distribution of that LO.  For an LS with a
   direct relationship to a Rule Maker, this requirement means that the
   LS MUST be configurable with an RM authorization policy.  An LS
   SHOULD define a prescribed set of RMs that may provide Rules for a
   given Target or LO.  For example, an LS may only allow the Target to
   set Rules for itself, or it might allow an RM to set Rules for
   several Targets (e.g., a parent for children, or a corporate security
   officer for employees).

   No matter how Rules are provided to an LS, for each LO it receives,
   it MUST combine all Rules that apply to the LO into a Rule set that
   defines which transmissions are authorized, and it MUST transmit
   location only in ways that are authorized by these Rules.

   An LS that receives Rules exclusively through LOs MUST examine the
   Rules that accompany a given LO in order to determine how the LS may
   use the LO (if any Rules are included by reference, the LS SHOULD
   attempt to download them).  If the LO includes no Rules that allow
   the LS to transmit the LO to another entity, then the LS MUST NOT
   transmit the LO.  If the LO contains no Rules at all (if it is in a
   format with no Rules syntax, for example), then the LS MUST delete
   it.

   An LS that receives Rules both directly from one or more Rule Makers
   and through LOs MUST combine the Rules in a given LO with Rules it
   has received from the RMs.  The strategy the LS uses to combine these
   sets of Rules is a matter for local policy, depending on the relative
   priority that the LS grants to each source of Rules.  Some example
   policies:

   Union:   A transmission of location is authorized if it is authorized
      by either a rule in the LO or an RM-provided rule.

   Intersection:   A transmission of location is authorized if it is
      authorized by both a rule in the LO and an RM-provided rule.

   RM Override:   A transmission of location is authorized if it is
      authorized by an RM-provided rule (regardless of the LO Rules).







Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 21]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   LO Override:   A transmission of location is authorized if it is
      authorized by a LO-provided rule (regardless of the RM Rules).

   In general, it is RECOMMENDED that an LS follow the "Intersection"
   policy, since it grants equal weight to all RMs (including the LO
   creator).  In cases where an external RM is more trusted than the
   source of the LO, the "RM Override" policy may be more suitable (for
   example, if the external RM is the Target, and the LO is provided by
   a third party).  Conversely, the "LO Override" policy is best suited
   to cases where the LO provider is more trused than the RM (for
   example, if the RM is the user of a mobile device LS and the LO
   contains Rules from the RM's parents or corporate security office).

3.2.5.  Security Considerations for Distribution

   An LS's decisions about how to transmit location are based on the
   identities of entities requesting information and other aspects of
   requests for location.  In order to ensure that these decisions are
   made properly, the LS needs assurance of the reliability of
   information on the identities of the entities with which the LS
   interacts (including LRs, LSes, and RMs) and other information in the
   request.

   Protocols to convey LOs and protocols to convey Rules MUST provide
   information on the identity of the recipient of location and the
   identity of the RM, respectively.  In order to ensure the validity of
   this information, these protocols MUST allow for mutual
   authentication of both parties, and MUST provide integrity protection
   for protocol messages.  These security features ensure that the LG
   has sufficient information (and sufficiently reliable information) to
   make privacy decisions.

   As they travel through the Internet, Location Objects necessarily
   pass through a sequence of intermediaries, ranging from layer-2
   switches to IP routers to application-layer proxies and gateways.
   The ability of an LS to protect privacy by making access control
   decisions is reduced if these intermediaries have access to a
   Location Object as it travels between privacy-preserving entities.

   Ideally, Location Objects should be transmitted with confidentiality
   protection end-to-end between an LS that transmits location and the
   LR that receives it.  In some cases, the protocol conveying an LO
   provides confidentiality protection as a built-in security solution
   for its signaling (and potentially its data traffic).  In this case,
   carrying an unprotected Location Object within such an encrypted
   channel is sufficient.  Many protocols, however, are offering
   communication modes where messages are either unprotected or
   protected on a hop-by-hop basis (for example, between intermediaries



Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 22]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   in a store-and-forward protocol).  In such a case it is RECOMMENDED
   that the protocol allows for the use of encrypted LOs, or for the
   transmission of a reference to location in place of a LO [13].

3.3.  Location Use

   The primary privacy requirement of a Location Recipient is to
   constrain its usage of location to the set of uses authorized by the
   Rules in a LO.  If an LR only uses a LO in ways that have minimal
   privacy impact -- specifically, if it does not transmit the LO to any
   other entity, and does not retain the LO for longer than is required
   to complete its interaction with the LS -- then no further action is
   necessary for the LR to comply with Geopriv requirements.

   As an example of this simplest case, if a Location Recipient (a)
   receives a location, (b) immediately provides to the Target
   information or a service based on the location, (c) does not retain
   the information, and (d) does not retransmit the location to any
   other entity, then the LR will comply with any set of Rules that are
   permissible under Geopriv.  Thus, a service that, for example, only
   provides directions to the closest bookstore in response to an input
   of location, and promptly then discards the input location, will be
   in compliance with any Geopriv Rule set.

   LRs that make other uses of a LO (e.g., those that store LOs, or send
   them to other service providers to obtain location-based services)
   MUST meet the requirements below to assure that these uses are
   authorized.

3.3.1.  Privacy Considerations for Use

   The principle privacy requirement for Location Recipients is to
   follow usage rules.  When an LR receives a LO, it is REQUIRED to
   examine the Rules included with that LO.  Any usage the LR makes of
   the LO MUST be explicitly authorized by these Rules.  Since Rules are
   positive grants of permission, any action not explicitly authorized
   is denied by default.

3.3.2.  Security Considerations for Use

   Since the Location Recipient role does not involve transmission of
   location, there are no protocol security considerations required to
   support privacy (other than ensuring that data does not leak
   unintentionally caused by security breaches).

   Aside from privacy, Location Recipients often require some assurance
   that a LO is reliable (assurance of the integrity, authenticity, and
   validity of an LO), since LRs use LOs in order to deliver location-



Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 23]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   based services.  Threats against this reliability and corresponding
   mitigations are discussed in the Security Considerations below.


4.  Security Considerations

   Security considerations related to the privacy of Location Objects
   are discussed throughout this document.  In this section we summarize
   those concerns and consider security risks not related to privacy.

   The life-cycle of a Location Object often consists of a series of
   location transmissions.  Protocols that carry location can provide
   strong assurances, but only for a single segment of the Location
   Object's life cycle.  In particular, a protocol can provide integrity
   protection and confidentiality for the data exchanged, and mutual
   authentication of the parties involved in the protocol, by using a
   secure transport such as IPsec or TLS.

   Additionally, if (1) the protocol provides mutual authentication for
   every segment, and (2) every entity in the location distribution
   chain exchanges information only with entities with whom it has a
   trust relationship, entities can transitively obtain assurances
   regarding the origin and ultimate destination of the Location Object.
   Of course, direct assurances are always preferred over assurances
   requiring transitive trust, since they require fewer assumptions.

   Using protocol mechanisms alone, the entities can receive assurances
   only about a single hop in the distribution chain.  For example,
   suppose that an LR receives location from an LS over an integrity-
   and confidentiality-protected channel.  The LR knows that the
   transmitted LO has not been modified or observed en route.  However,
   the assurances provided by the protocol do not guarantee that the
   transmitted LO was not corrupted before it was sent to the LS (by a
   previous LS, for example).  Likewise, the LR can verify that the LO
   was transmitted by the LS, but cannot verify the origin of the LO if
   it did not originate with the LS.

   Security mechanisms in protocols are thus unable to provide direct
   assurances over multiple transmissions of a LO.  However, the
   transmission of location "by reference" can be used to effectively
   turn multi-hop paths into single-hop paths.  If the multiple
   transmissions of a LO are replaced by multiple transmissions of a URI
   (a multi-hop dissemination channel), the LO need only traverse a
   single hop, namely the dereference transaction between the LR and the
   dereference server.

   The major threats to the security of Location Objects can be grouped
   into two categories.  First, threats against the integrity and



Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 24]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   authenticity of Location Objects can expose entities that rely on
   Location Objects.  Second, threats against the confidentiality of
   Location Objects can allow unauthorized access to location
   information.

   A Location Object contains four essential types of information:
   identifiers for the described Target, location information, time-
   stamps, and Rules.  By grouping values of these various types
   together within a single structure, a Location Object encodes a set
   of bindings among them.  That is, the Location Object asserts that
   the identified Target was present at the given location at the given
   time and that the given Rules express the Target's desired policy at
   that time for the distribution of his location.  Below, we provide a
   description of the assurances required by each party involved in the
   location distribution in order to mitigate the possible attacks on
   these bindings.

   Rule Maker:   The Rule Maker is responsible for creating the Target's
      Privacy Rules and for uploading them to the location servers.  The
      primary assurance required by the Rule Maker is that the Target's
      Privacy Rules are correctly associated with the Target's identity
      when they are conveyed to each location server that handles the
      Location Object.  Ensuring the integrity of the Privacy Rules
      distributed to the location servers prevents rule-tampering
      attacks.  In many circumstances, the privacy policy of the Target
      may itself be sensitive information; in these cases, the Rule
      Maker also requires the assurance that the binding between the
      Target's identity and the Target's Privacy Rules are not deducible
      by anyone other than an authorized Location Server.

   Location Server:   The Location Server is responsible for enforcing
      the Target's Privacy Rules.  The first assurance required by the
      Location Server is that the binding between the Target's Privacy
      Rules and the Target's identity is authentic.  Authenticating and
      authorizing the Rule Maker who creates, updates and deletes the
      Privacy Rules prevents rule-tampering attacks.  The Location
      Server has to ensure that the authorization policies are not
      exposed to third parties, if so desired by the Rule Maker (when
      the rules themselves are privacy-sensitive).

   Location Recipient:   The Location Recipient is the consumer of the
      Location Object.  The Location Recipient thus requires assurances
      about the authenticity of the bindings between the Target's
      location, the Target's identity and the time.  Ensuring the
      authenticity of these bindings helps to prevent various attacks,
      such falsifying the location, modifying the time-stamp, faking the
      identity, replaying location objects.




Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 25]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   Location Generator:   The primary assurance required by the Location
      Generator is that the Location Server to which the Location Object
      is initially published is one that is trusted to enforce the
      Target's Privacy Rules.  Authenticating the trusted Location
      Server mitigates the risk of server impersonation attacks.
      Additionally, the Location Generator is responsible for the
      location determination process, which is also security sensible as
      wrong input provided by external entites can lead to undesireable
      disclosure or access to location information information.

   Assurances as to the integrity and confidentiality of a Location
   Object can be provided directly through the Location Object format.
   RFC 4119 provides a description for usage of S/MIME to integrity and
   confidentility protection.  Although such direct, end-to-end
   assurances are desirable, and these mechanisms should be used
   whenever possible, there are many deployment scenarios where directly
   securing a Location Object is impractical.  For example, in some
   deployment scenarios a direct trust relationship may not exist
   between the creator of the Location Object and the recipient.
   Additionally, in a scenario where many recipients are authorized to
   receive a given Location Object, the creator of the Location Object
   cannot guarantee end-to-end confidentiality without knowing precisely
   which recipient will receive the Location Object.  Many of these
   cases can, however, be addressed by the usage of a Location-by-
   Reference (possibly combined with a location object).


5.  Example Scenarios

   This section contains a set of example of how the Geopriv
   architecture can be deployed in practice.  These examples are meant
   to illustrate key points of the architecture, rather than to form an
   exhaustive set of use cases.

   For convenience and clarity in these examples, we assume that the
   Privacy Rules that a LO carries are equivalent to those in a PIDF-LO
   Location Object (namely, that the principal Rules that can be set are
   limits on the retransmission and retention of the LO).  While these
   two Rules are the most well-known and important examples, the
   specific types of Rules an LS or LR must consider will in general
   depend on the types of LO it processes.

5.1.  Minimal Scenario

   One of the simplest scenarios in the Geopriv architecture is when a
   Device determines its own location and uses that LO to request a
   service (e.g., by including the LO in an HTTP POST request or SIP
   INVITE message), and the server delivers that service immediately



Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 26]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   (e.g., in a 200 OK response in HTTP or SIP), without retaining or
   retransmitting the Device's location.  The Device acts as an LG by
   using a Device-based positioning algorithm (e.g., manual entry) and
   as a Location Server by interpreting the rule and transmitting the
   LO.  The Target acts as a Rule Maker by specifying that the location
   should be sent to the server.  The server acts as a Location
   Recipient by receiving and using the LO.

   In this case, the privacy of location information is maintained in
   two steps: The first step is that location is only transmitted as
   directed by the single Rule Maker, namely the Target.  The second
   step is simply the fact that the server, as LR, does not do anything
   that creates a privacy risk -- it does not retain or retransmit
   location.  Because the server limits its behavior in this way, it
   does not need to read the Rules in the LO (even though they were
   provided) -- no Rule would prevent it from using location in this
   safe manner.

   The following outline summarizes this scenario:

   o  Positioning: Device-based, Device=LG

   o  Distribution hop 1: HTTP UA --> Ephemeral web service, privacy via
      user indication

   o  Use: Ephemeral web service delivers response without retaining or
      retransmitting location

   o  Key points:

      *  LRs that do not behave in ways that risk privacy are Geopriv-
         compliant by default.  No further action is necessary.

5.2.  Location-based Web Services

   Many location-based services are delivered over the Web, using
   Javascript code to orchestrate a series of HTTP requests for location
   specific information.  To support these applications, browser
   extensions have been developed that support Device-based positioning
   (manual entry and GPS) and network-assisted positioning (via AGPS,
   and multilateration with 802.11 and cellular signals), exposing
   position to web pages through Javascript APIs.

   In this scenario, we consider a Target that uses a browser with a
   network-assisted positioning extension.  When the Target uses this
   browser to request location-based services from a web page, the
   browser prompts the user to grant the page permission to access the
   user's location.  If the user grants permission, the browser



Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 27]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   extension sends 802.11 signal strength measurements to a positioning
   server, which then returns the position of the host.  The extension
   constructs a Location Object with this location and Rules set by the
   user, then passes the LO to the page through its Javascript API.  The
   page then obtains location-relevant information using an
   XMLHttpRequest [14] to a server in the same domain as the page and
   renders this information to the user.

   At first blush, this scenario seems much more complicated than the
   minimal scenario above.  However, most of the privacy considerations
   are actually the same.

   The positioning phase in this scenario begins when the browser
   extension contacts the positioning server.  The positioning server
   acts as a Location Generator.

   The distribution phase actually occurs entirely within the Target
   host.  This phase begins when the positioning server, now acting as
   LS, follows the LCP policy by providing location only to the Target.
   The next hop in distribution occurs when the browser extension (an
   entity under the control of the Target) passes a LO to the web page
   (an entity under the control of its author).  In this phase, the
   browser extension acts as an LS, with the Target as the sole Rule
   Maker; the user interface for rule-making is effectively a protocol
   for conveying Rules, and the extension's API effectively defines a a
   way to communicate LOs and a LO Format.  The web site acts as
   Location Recipient when the web page accepts the LO.

   The use phase encompasses the web site's use of the LO.  In this
   context, the phrase "web site" encompasses not only the web page, but
   also the dedicated supporting logic behind it.  Considering the
   entire web site as a recipient, rather than a single page, it becomes
   clear that sending the LO in an XMLHttpRequest to a back-end server
   is like passing it to a separate component of the LR (as opposed to
   retransmitting it to another entity).  Thus, even in this case, where
   location-relevant information is obtained from a back-end server, the
   LR does not retain or retransmit location, so its behavior is
   "privacy-safe" -- it doesn't need to interpret the Rules in the LO.

   However, consider a variation on this scenario where the web page
   requests additional information (a map, for instance) from a third-
   party site.  In this case, since location is being transmitted to a
   third party, the web site (either in the web page or in a back-end
   server) would need to verify that this transmission is allowed by the
   LO's Privacy Rules.  Similarly, if the site wanted to log the user's
   location information, then it would need to examine the LO to
   determine how long this information can be retained.  In such a case,
   if the LR needs to do something that is not allowed by the Rules, it



Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 28]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   may have to deny service to the user (hopefully providing a message
   with the reason).  Nonetheless, if the Rules permit retention or
   retransmission (even if this retransmission is limited by access
   control rules), then the LR may do so to the extent the Rules allow.

   The following outline summarizes this scenario:

   o  Positioning: Network-assisted, positioning server=LG

   o  Rule installation: RM (=Target) gives permission to sites and sets
      LO Rules

   o  Distribution hop 1: positioning server=LS --> Target, privacy via
      LCP policy

   o  Distribution hop 2: Browser=LS --> Web site=LR, privacy via user
      confirmation

   o  Use: Back-end server delivers location-relevant information
      without further retransmission, then deletes location; privacy via
      safe behavior

   o  Key points:

      *  Privacy in this scenario is provided by a combination of
         explicit user direction and Rules in an LO

      *  Distribution can occur within a host, between mutually
         untrusting components

      *  Some transmissions of location are actually internal to an LR

      *  LRs that do things that might be constrained by Rules need to
         verify that these actions are allowed for a particular LO

5.3.  Emergency Calling

   Support for emergency calls by Voice-over-IP devices is a critical
   use case for location information about Internet hosts.  The details
   of the Internet architecture for emergency calling are described in
   [15][16].  In this architecture, there are three critical steps in
   the placement of an emergency call, each involving location
   information:

   1.  Determine the location of the caller

   2.  Determine the proper Public Safety Answering Point (PSAP) for the
       caller's location



Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 29]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   3.  Send a SIP INVITE message (including the caller's location) to
       the PSAP

   The first step in an emergency call is to determine the location of
   the caller.  This step is the positioning phase of the location life-
   cycle.  Location is determined by whatever means are available to the
   caller's device, or to the network, if this step is being done by a
   proxy.  Whichever entity does the positioning (either the caller or a
   proxy) acts as an Location Server, preserving the privacy of location
   information by only including it in emergency calls.

   The second step in an emergency call encompasses location
   distribution and use.  The entity that is routing the emergency call
   sends location though the LoST protocol [17] to a mapping server.  In
   this role, the routing entity acts as a Location Server and the LoST
   server acts as a Location Recipient.  The LO format within LoST does
   not allow Rules to be sent along with location, but because LoST is
   an application-specific protocol, the sending of location within a
   LoST message authorizes the LoST server to use the location to
   complete the protocol, namely to route the message as necessary
   through the LoST mapping architecture [18].  That is, the LoST server
   is authorized to complete the LoST protocol, but to do nothing else.

   The third step in an emergency call is again a combination of
   distribution and use.  The caller (or another entity that inserts the
   caller's location) acts as an LS and the PSAP acts as a Location
   Recipient.  In this specific example, the caller's location is
   transmitted either as a PIDF-LO object or as a reference that returns
   a PIDF-LO (or both); in the latter case, the reference should be
   appropriately protected so that only the PSAP has access.  In any
   case, the receipt of a LO implies that the PSAP should obey the Rules
   in those LOs in order to preserve privacy.  Depending on the
   regulatory environment, the PSAP may have the option to ignore those
   constraints in order to respond to an emergency, or it may be bound
   to respect these Rules (in spite of the emergency situation).

   The following outline summarizes this scenario:

   o  Positioning: Any

   o  Distribution/use hop 1: Target=LS --> LoST infrastructure (no
      Rules), privacy via authorization implicit in protocol

   o  Distribution/use hop 2: Target=LS --> PSAP, privacy via Rules in
      LO

   o  Use: PSAP uses location to deliver emergency services




Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 30]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   o  Key points:

      *  Privacy in this scenario is provided by a combination of
         explicit user direction, implicit authorization particular to a
         protocol, and Rules in an LO

      *  LRs may be constrained to respect or ignore Privacy Rules by
         local regulation

5.4.  Combination of Services

   In modern Internet applications, users frequently receive information
   via one channel and broadcast it via another.  In this sense, both
   users and channels (e.g., web services) become location servers.
   Here we consider a more complex example that illustrates this pattern
   across multiple logical hops.

   Suppose Alice (the Target) subscribes to a wireless ISP that
   determines her location using a network-based positioning technique
   (e.g., via the location of the base station serving the Target), and
   provides that information directly to a location-enhanced presence
   provider (which might use SIP, XMPP, or another protocol).  The
   location-enhanced presence provider allows Alice to specify Rules for
   how this location is distributed: which friends should receive
   Alice's location and what Rules they should get with it.  Alice uses
   a few other location-enhanced services as well, so she sends Rules
   that allow her location to be shared with those services, and allow
   those services to retain and retransmit her location.

   Bob is one of Alice's friends, and he receives her location via this
   location-enhanced presence service.  Noting that she's at their
   favorite coffee shop, Bob wants to upload a photo of the two of them
   at the coffee shop to a photo-sharing site, along with a LO that
   marks the location.  Bob checks the Rules in Alice's LO and verifies
   that the photo sharing site is one of the services that Alice
   authorized.  Seeing that Alice has authorized him to give the LO to
   the photo-sharing site, he attaches it to the photo and uploads it.

   Once the geo-tagged photo is uploaded, the photo sharing site reads
   the Rules in the LO and verifies that the site is authorized to store
   the photo and to share it with others.  Since Alice has allowed the
   site to retransmit and retain without any constraints, the site
   fulfills Bob's request to make the geo-tagged photo publicly
   accessible.

   Eve, another user of the photo sharing site, downloads the photo of
   Alice and Bob at the coffee shop and receives Alice's LO along with
   it.  Eve posts the photo and location to her public page on a social



Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 31]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   networking site without checking the Rules, even though the LO
   doesn't allow Eve to send the location anywhere else.  The social
   networking site, however, observes that no retransmission or
   retention are allowed (both of which it needs for a public posting),
   and rejects the upload.

   In terms of the location life-cycle, this scenario consists of a
   positioning step, followed by four distribution hops and use.
   Positioning is the simplest step: An LG in Alice's ISP monitors her
   location and transmits it to the presence service, maintaining
   privacy by only transmitting location to a single entity (to which
   Alice has delegated privacy responsibilities).

   The first distribution hop occurs when the presence server sends
   location to Bob. In this transaction, the presence server acts as an
   LS, Alice acts as an RM, and Bob acts as an LR.  The privacy of this
   transaction is assured by the fact that Alice has installed Rules on
   the presence server that dictate who it may allow to access her
   location.  The second distribution hop is when Bob uploads the LO to
   the photo-sharing site.  Here Bob acts as an LS, preserving the
   privacy of location information by verifying that the Rules in the LO
   allow him to upload it.  The third distribution hop is when the
   photo-sharing site sends the LO to Eve, likewise following the Rules
   -- but a different set of Rules than Bob, since a LO can specify
   different Rule sets for different Location Servers.

   Eve is the fourth LS in the chain, and fails to comply with Geopriv
   by not checking the Rules in the LO prior to uploading the LO to the
   social networking site.  The site, however, is a responsible LR -- it
   checks the Rules in the LO, sees that they don't allow it to use the
   location as it needs to, and discards the LO.

   The following outline summarizes this scenario:

   o  Positioning: Network-based, LG in network, privacy via exclusive
      relationship with presence service

   o  Distribution/use hop 1: Presence server --> Bob, privacy via
      Alice's access control rules

   o  Distribution/use hop 2: Bob --> photo sharing site, privacy via
      Rules for Bob in LO

   o  Distribution/use hop 3: Photo sharing site --> Eve, privacy via
      Rules for site in LO

   o  Distribution/use hop 4: Eve --> Social networking site, violates
      privacy by retransmitting



Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 32]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   o  Use: Social networking site, privacy via checking Rules and
      discarding

   o  Key points:

      *  Privacy can be preserved through multiple hops

      *  A LO can specify different Rules for different entities

      *  An LS can still disobey the Rules, but even then, the
         architecture still works in some cases


6.  Glossary

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [1].

   $ Access Control Rule

      A rule that describe which entities may receive location
      information and in what form.

   $ civic location

      The geographic position of an entity in terms of a postal address
      or civic landmark.  Examples of such data are room number, street
      number, street name, city, ZIP code, county, state and country.

   $ Device

      The technical device whose location is tracked as a proxy for the
      location of a Target.

   $ geodetic location

      The geographic position of an entity in a particular coordinate
      system (for example, a latitude-longitude pair).

   $ Local Rule

      A Privacy Rules that directs a Location Server about how to treat
      a Target's location information.  Local Rules are used internally
      by a Location Server to handle requests from Location Recipients.
      They are not distributed to Location Recipients.





Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 33]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   $ Location Generator (LG)

      Performs the role of initially determining or gathering the
      location of a Target.  Location Generators may be any sort of
      software or hardware used to obtain a Target's location (examples
      include GPS chips and cellular networks).

   $ Location Information Server (LIS)

      An entity responsible for providing devices within an access
      network with information about their own locations.  A Location
      Information Server uses knowledge of the access network and its
      physical topology to generate and distribute location information
      to devices.

   $ Location Object (LO)

      A data unit that conveys location information together with
      Privacy Rules within the Geopriv architecture.  A Location Object
      may convey geodetic location data (latitiude/longitude/altitude),
      civic location data (street/city/state/etc.), or both.

   $ Location Recipient (LR)

      An ultimate end point entity to which a Location Object is
      distributed.  Location Recipients request location information
      about a particular Target from a Location Server.  If allowed by
      the appropriate Privacy Rules, a Location Recipient will receive
      Location Objects describing the Target's location from the
      Location Server.

   $ Location Server (LS)

      An entity that receives Location Objects from Location Generators,
      Privacy Rules from Rule Makers, and location requests from
      Location Recipients.  A Location Server applies the appropriate
      Privacy Rules to a Location Object received from a Location
      Generator and may disclose the Location Object, in compliance with
      the Rules, to Location Recipients.

      Location Servers may not necessarily be "servers" in the
      colloquial sense of hosts in remote data centers servicing
      requests.  Rather, a Location Server can be any software or
      hardware component that receives and distributes location
      information.  Examples include a positioning server (with a
      location interface) in an access network, a presence server, or a
      Web browser or other software running on a Target's device.




Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 34]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   $ Privacy Rule

      A directive that regulates an entity's activities with respect to
      a Target's location information, including the collection, use,
      disclosure, and retention of the location information.  Privacy
      Rules describe how location information may be used by an entity,
      the level of detail with which location information may be
      described to an entity, and the conditions under which location
      information may be disclosed to an entity.  Privacy Rules are
      communicated from Rule Makers to Location Servers and conveyed in
      Location Objects throughout the Geopriv architecture.

   $ Rule

      See Privacy Rule.

   $ Rule Maker (RM)

      An individual or entity that is authorized to set Privacy Rules
      for a Target.  In some cases a Rule Maker and a Target will be the
      same individual or entity, and in other cases they will be
      separate.  For example, a parent may serve as the Rule Maker when
      the Target is his child.  The Rule Maker is also not necessarily
      the owner of a Target device.  For example, a corporation may own
      a device that it provides to an employee but permit the employee
      to serve as the Rule Maker and set her own Privacy Rules.  Rule
      Makers provide the Privacy Rules associated with a Target to
      Location Servers.

   $ Forwarded Rule

      A Privacy Rule that travels inside a Location Object.  Forwarded
      Rules direct Location Recipients about how to handle the location
      information they receive.  Because the Forwarded Rules themselves
      may reveal potentially sensitive information about a Target, only
      the minimal subset of Forwarded Rules necessary for a Location
      Recipient to handle a Location Object is distributed to the
      Location Recipient.

   $ Target

      An individual or other entity whose location is sought in the
      Geopriv architecture.  In many cases the Target will be the human
      user of a Device, or it may be an object such as a vehicle or
      shipping container to which a Device is attached.  In some
      instances the Target will be the Device itself.  The Target is the
      entity whose privacy Geopriv seeks to protect.




Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 35]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   $ Usage Rule

      A rule that describe what uses of location information are
      authorized.


7.  Acknowledgements

   Section 4 is largely based on the security investigations conducted
   as part of the Geopriv Layer-7 Location Configuration Protocol design
   team, which produced [8].  We would like to thank all the members of
   the design team.

   We would also like to thank Marc Linsner and Martin Thomson for their
   contributions regarding terminology and LCPs.


8.  IANA Considerations

   This document makes no request of IANA.


9.  References

9.1.  Normative References

   [1]   Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate Requirement
         Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

9.2.  Informative References

   [2]   Cuellar, J., Morris, J., Mulligan, D., Peterson, J., and J.
         Polk, "Geopriv Requirements", RFC 3693, February 2004.

   [3]   Danley, M., Mulligan, D., Morris, J., and J. Peterson, "Threat
         Analysis of the Geopriv Protocol", RFC 3694, February 2004.

   [4]   U.S. Department of Defense, "National Industrial Security
         Program Operating Manual", DoD 5220-22M, January 1995.

   [5]   Schulzrinne, H., Tschofenig, H., Morris, J., Cuellar, J., Polk,
         J., and J. Rosenberg, "Common Policy: A Document Format for
         Expressing Privacy Preferences", RFC 4745, February 2007.

   [6]   Schulzrinne, H., Tschofenig, H., Morris, J., Cuellar, J., and
         J. Polk, "Geolocation Policy: A Document Format for Expressing
         Privacy Preferences for  Location Information",
         draft-ietf-geopriv-policy-21 (work in progress), July 2009.



Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 36]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   [7]   Rosenberg, J., "The Extensible Markup Language (XML)
         Configuration Access Protocol (XCAP)", RFC 4825, May 2007.

   [8]   Tschofenig, H. and H. Schulzrinne, "GEOPRIV Layer 7 Location
         Configuration Protocol; Problem Statement and  Requirements",
         draft-ietf-geopriv-l7-lcp-ps-10 (work in progress), July 2009.

   [9]   Polk, J., Schnizlein, J., and M. Linsner, "Dynamic Host
         Configuration Protocol Option for Coordinate-based Location
         Configuration Information", RFC 3825, July 2004.

   [10]  Schulzrinne, H., "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCPv4
         and DHCPv6) Option for Civic Addresses Configuration
         Information", RFC 4776, November 2006.

   [11]  Polk, J., "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) IPv4 and
         IPv6 Option for a  Location Uniform Resource Identifier (URI)",
         draft-ietf-geopriv-dhcp-lbyr-uri-option-06 (work in progress),
         September 2009.

   [12]  Barnes, M., Winterbottom, J., Thomson, M., and B. Stark, "HTTP
         Enabled Location Delivery (HELD)",
         draft-ietf-geopriv-http-location-delivery-16 (work in
         progress), August 2009.

   [13]  Marshall, R., "Requirements for a Location-by-Reference
         Mechanism", draft-ietf-geopriv-lbyr-requirements-08 (work in
         progress), September 2009.

   [14]  World Wide Web Consortium, "The XMLHttpRequest Object", W3C
         document http://www.w3.org/TR/XMLHttpRequest/, April 2008.

   [15]  Rosen, B., Schulzrinne, H., Polk, J., and A. Newton, "Framework
         for Emergency Calling using Internet Multimedia",
         draft-ietf-ecrit-framework-10 (work in progress), July 2009.

   [16]  Rosen, B. and J. Polk, "Best Current Practice for
         Communications Services in support of Emergency  Calling",
         draft-ietf-ecrit-phonebcp-13 (work in progress), July 2009.

   [17]  Hardie, T., Newton, A., Schulzrinne, H., and H. Tschofenig,
         "LoST: A Location-to-Service Translation Protocol", RFC 5222,
         August 2008.

   [18]  Schulzrinne, H., "Location-to-URL Mapping Architecture and
         Framework", draft-ietf-ecrit-mapping-arch-04 (work in
         progress), March 2009.




Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 37]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   [19]  Peterson, J., "A Presence-based GEOPRIV Location Object
         Format", RFC 4119, December 2005.

   [20]  Polk, J. and B. Rosen, "Location Conveyance for the Session
         Initiation Protocol", draft-ietf-sip-location-conveyance-13
         (work in progress), March 2009.

URIs

   [21]  <http://creativecommons.org/>


Authors' Addresses

   Richard Barnes
   BBN Technologies
   9861 Broken Land Pkwy, Suite 400
   Columbia, MD  21046
   USA

   Phone: +1 410 290 6169
   Email: rbarnes@bbn.com


   Matt Lepinski
   BBN Technologies
   10 Moulton St
   Cambridge, MA  02138
   USA

   Phone: +1 617 873 5939
   Email: mlepinski@bbn.com


   Alissa Cooper
   Center for Democracy & Technology
   1634 I Street NW, Suite 1100
   Washington, DC
   USA

   Email: acooper@cdt.org










Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 38]

Internet-Draft       Internet Location Architecture         October 2009


   John Morris
   Center for Democracy & Technology
   1634 I Street NW, Suite 1100
   Washington, DC
   USA

   Email: jmorris@cdt.org


   Hannes Tschofenig
   Nokia Siemens Networks
   Linnoitustie 6
   Espoo  02600
   Finland

   Phone: +358 (50) 4871445
   Email: Hannes.Tschofenig@gmx.net
   URI:   http://www.tschofenig.priv.at


   Henning Schulzrinne
   Columbia University
   Department of Computer Science
   450 Computer Science Building
   New York, NY  10027
   US

   Phone: +1 212 939 7004
   Email: hgs@cs.columbia.edu
   URI:   http://www.cs.columbia.edu





















Barnes, et al.           Expires April 29, 2010                [Page 39]


