


Network Working Group                                            Q. Zeng
Internet-Draft
Intended status: Standards Track                                 J. Dong
Expires: April 25, 2013                              Huawei Technologies
                                                                J. Heitz
                                                           Ericsson Inc.
                                                                K. Patel
                                                           Cisco Systems
                                                               R. Shakir
                                                                      BT
                                                                Z. Huang
                                                           China Telecom
                                                        October 22, 2012


     One-time Address-Prefix Based Outbound Route Filter for BGP-4
                 draft-zeng-idr-one-time-prefix-orf-03

Abstract

   This document defines a new Outbound Router Filter (ORF) type for
   BGP, termed "One-time Address Prefix Outbound Route Filter", which
   would allow a BGP speaker to send to its BGP peer a route refresh
   request with a set of address-prefix-based filters to make the peer
   send only the specific routes matching the filters to the speaker.
   This ORF-type enables a BGP speaker to re-advertise some specific
   routes without the need of advertising the whole Adj-RIB-Out of a
   specific address family, which makes the route recovery and trouble
   shooting operation more efficient and also reduces the impact on
   network stability.  This filter does not change the outbound route
   filters or policies on the BGP peer and should only be used for one-
   time route filtering.

Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.



Zeng, et al.             Expires April 25, 2013                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft      One-time Address-Prefix Based ORF       October 2012


   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on April 25, 2013.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2012 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.






























Zeng, et al.             Expires April 25, 2013                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft      One-time Address-Prefix Based ORF       October 2012


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   2.  One-time Address Prefix ORF-Type  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   3.  Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
   4.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   6.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   7.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     7.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
     7.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7







































Zeng, et al.             Expires April 25, 2013                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft      One-time Address-Prefix Based ORF       October 2012


1.  Introduction

   The Outbound Route Filtering Capability defined in [RFC5291] provides
   a mechanism for a BGP speaker to send to its BGP peer a set of
   Outbound Route Filters (ORFs) that can be used by its peer to filter
   its outbound routing updates to the speaker.

   In some scenarios, BGP speaker only needs to retrieve some specific
   routes from its peer if the routes are possibly lost or contain some
   problematic attributes for some reason, but sending ROUTE-REFRESH
   message [RFC2918] will lead to the peer re-advertising its whole Adj-
   RIB-Out.  Such large numbers of updates include a lot of unnecessary
   route updates which may make trouble shooting operation (such as
   packets tracking) more difficult, and is a waste of the processing
   resources and network bandwidth.  With the increase of IPv6
   deployment, this problem could be more significant.  Even configured
   with ORF mechanism as defined in [RFC5291], on receipt of a ROUTE-
   REFRESH message, the peer will re-advertise all the routes matching
   the current outbound route filters, i.e., the whole Adj-Rib-Out for
   this BGP speaker.  Since in this case the BGP speaker does not want
   to change the outbound route filters on its peer, this problem cannot
   be solved by existing ORF mechanism.

   This document defines a new Outbound Router Filter (ORF) type for
   BGP, termed "One-time Address Prefix Outbound Route Filter", which
   would allow a BGP speaker to send to its BGP peer a route refresh
   request with a set of address-prefix-based filters to make the peer
   send only the specific routes matching these filters to the speaker.
   This new ORF-type enables a BGP speaker to re-advertise some specific
   routes without the need of advertising the whole Adj-RIB-Out of a
   particular address family, which makes the route recovery and trouble
   shooting operation (such as packet tracking) more efficient and also
   reduces the impact on network stability.  This filter does not change
   the outbound route filters or policies on the BGP peer and should
   only be used for one-time route filtering.

   Consider the following scenario: In an Inter-AS environment, ASBR-A
   received a malformed UPDATE from ASBR-B and treated it as withdraw
   according to [I-D.ietf-idr-error-handling].  While such event would
   be locally logged and the operators may be notified, it is important
   for ASBR-A to try to recover these routes as soon as possible since
   the routes which are treated as withdraw may impact some critical
   services.  A good method is to ask the peering ASBR-B to re-advertise
   such routes with some back off mechanism.  One-time Prefix ORF is a
   low impact way to achieve this.






Zeng, et al.             Expires April 25, 2013                 [Page 4]

Internet-Draft      One-time Address-Prefix Based ORF       October 2012


2.  One-time Address Prefix ORF-Type

   This document defines a new ORF type: One-time Address Prefix ORF.

   In the following description, the sending speaker sends a one-time
   ORF request and the receiving speaker receives it and sends back the
   routes to satisfy the request.

   As specified in the [RFC5291], an ORF entry is a tuple of the form
   <AFI/SAFI, ORF-Type, Action, Match, ORF-value>; an ORF consists of
   one or more ORF entries that have a common AFI/SAFI and ORF-Type.  An
   ORF is identified by <AFI/SAFI, ORF-Type>.

   The format of One-time Address Prefix ORF-Type entry is the same as
   the encoding of Address Prefix ORF in [RFC5292], with the specific
   fields defined as follows:

   Since the semantics of this new ORF-Type is always "one-time
   filtering" and has no impact on the existing ORFs, the Action field
   MUST be ignored.

   The matching rules of the One-time Address Prefix ORF are the same as
   defined in Address-Prefix-Based ORF [RFC5292].

   The ORF entries of this type are used as one-time filters and MUST
   not change any previously installed ORF entry on the receiving
   speaker.


3.  Operation

   The capability negotiation of <AFI/SAFI, One-time Address Prefix ORF>
   MUST NOT delay the advertisement of routes with this AFI/SAFI.

   The received One-time Address Prefix ORF entries SHOULD only be used
   for one-time route filtering and MUST NOT be saved locally.  The
   received One-time Address Prefix ORF entries MUST NOT modify the
   outbound route filters on the receiving speaker (either locally
   configured or received from the sending speaker through ORF).

   On receipt of ROUTE-REFRESH message with One-time Address Prefix ORF
   entries, the receiving speaker SHOULD re-advertise to the sending
   speaker the routes from the Adj-RIB-Out associated with the sending
   speaker which pass the entries carried in the One-time Address Prefix
   ORF as well as the locally saved ORFs (if any) received from the
   sending speaker.

   Since different processing orders may lead to different results, the



Zeng, et al.             Expires April 25, 2013                 [Page 5]

Internet-Draft      One-time Address-Prefix Based ORF       October 2012


   One-time ORFs and the regular ORFs SHOULD not be encoded in one
   ROUTE-REFRESH message.

   During the period when the receiving speaker is sending updates to
   satisfy the One-time ORF request, it may experience other routing
   activity that will require it to send updates unrelated to the One-
   time ORF request.  It is permitted to send these updates before it
   has completed sending the One-time ORF related updates.

   Similarly, if a route that passes the One-time ORF has already been
   sent and the receiving speaker experiences routing activity that
   changes this route and the receiving speaker has not yet sent all
   routes to satisfy the One-time ORF request, it is permitted to send
   the changed route immediately.

   Details about how to interoperate when both One-time ORF Capability
   and the Enhanced Route Refresh Capability as described in
   [I-D.ietf-idr-bgp-enhanced-route-refresh] are enabled will be
   discussed in a future version.


4.  IANA Considerations

   This document specifies a new Outbound Route Filtering (ORF) type,
   One-time Address-Prefix ORF.  The value of the ORF-type needs to be
   assigned by the IANA.


5.  Security Considerations

   This extension to BGP does not change the underlying security issues
   in [RFC4271].


6.  Acknowledgements

   The authors would like to thank Enke Chen, Susan Hares, Haibo Wang,
   Jiawei Dong, Yaqun Xiao and Mach Chen for their valuable suggestions
   and comments to this document.


7.  References

7.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.




Zeng, et al.             Expires April 25, 2013                 [Page 6]

Internet-Draft      One-time Address-Prefix Based ORF       October 2012


   [RFC2918]  Chen, E., "Route Refresh Capability for BGP-4", RFC 2918,
              September 2000.

   [RFC4271]  Rekhter, Y., Li, T., and S. Hares, "A Border Gateway
              Protocol 4 (BGP-4)", RFC 4271, January 2006.

   [RFC5291]  Chen, E. and Y. Rekhter, "Outbound Route Filtering
              Capability for BGP-4", RFC 5291, August 2008.

   [RFC5292]  Chen, E. and S. Sangli, "Address-Prefix-Based Outbound
              Route Filter for BGP-4", RFC 5292, August 2008.

7.2.  Informative References

   [I-D.ietf-idr-bgp-enhanced-route-refresh]
              Patel, K., Chen, E., and B. Venkatachalapathy, "Enhanced
              Route Refresh Capability for BGP-4",
              draft-ietf-idr-bgp-enhanced-route-refresh-02 (work in
              progress), June 2012.

   [I-D.ietf-idr-error-handling]
              Scudder, J., Chen, E., Mohapatra, P., and K. Patel,
              "Revised Error Handling for BGP UPDATE Messages",
              draft-ietf-idr-error-handling-02 (work in progress),
              June 2012.


Authors' Addresses

   Qing Zeng
   Beijing
   China

   Email: zengqqqq@gmail.com


   Jie Dong
   Huawei Technologies
   Huawei Building, No.156 Beiqing Rd
   Beijing  100095
   China

   Email: jie.dong@huawei.com








Zeng, et al.             Expires April 25, 2013                 [Page 7]

Internet-Draft      One-time Address-Prefix Based ORF       October 2012


   Jakob Heitz
   Ericsson Inc.
   100 Headquarters Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Email: jakob.heitz@ericsson.com


   Keyur Patel
   Cisco Systems
   170 W. Tasman Drive
   San Jose, CA  95134
   USA

   Email: keyupate@cisco.com


   Rob Shakir
   BT
   London
   UK

   Email: rob.shakir@bt.com


   ZhiLan Huang
   China Telecom
   109 West Zhongshan Ave
   Guangzhou  510630
   China

   Email: huangzl@gsta.com


















Zeng, et al.             Expires April 25, 2013                 [Page 8]

