


PPSP                                                             W. Zeng
Internet-Draft                                       Huawei Technologies
Intended status: Informational                             June 29, 2010
Expires: December 31, 2010


            P2P Streaming Protocol Pro-incentive Parameters
             draft-zeng-ppsp-protocol-pro-incentive-para-00

Abstract

   This document analyzes the common parameters that are essential for
   deriving incentive mechanisms to promote peer cooperation and system
   robustness in a P2P system, and proposes to incorporate these pro-
   incentive parameters in information exchanges in the P2P streaming
   protocols to be specified, e.g., in the tracker protocol proposed in
   [draft-gu-ppsp-tracker-protocol], and in the future in the peer
   protocol to be specified.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on December 31, 2010.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2010 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of



Zeng                    Expires December 31, 2010               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft          Pro-incentive Parameters               June 2010


   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   2.  Document Conventions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     2.1.  Notational Conventions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
     2.2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
   3.  Incentives in P2P Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
     3.1.  Measurement of peer contribution  . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
   4.  Pro-incentive Protocol Parameters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
   5.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   6.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   7.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   8.  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     8.1.  Normative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
     8.2.  Informative References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
   Author's Address  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8































Zeng                    Expires December 31, 2010               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft          Pro-incentive Parameters               June 2010


1.  Introduction

   Lack of cooperation (free riding) is one of the key problems that
   confront today's P2P systems.  What makes this problem particularly
   difficult is the unique set of challenges that P2P systems pose:
   large populations, high turnover, asymmetry of interest, collusion,
   zero-cost identities, and traitors [RobustIncentives].

   Many incentive mechanisms have been proposed in the literature to
   promote cooperation and system robustness of a P2P system.  The goal
   of this contribution however is not to choose a particular incentive
   mechanism to specify in the P2P streaming protocol, but instead is to
   analyze the common parameters that are essential for various
   incentive mechanisms, and propose to incorporate these pro-incentive
   parameters in information exchanges in the P2P streaming protocols.


2.  Document Conventions

2.1.  Notational Conventions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119]

2.2.  Terminology

   The draft uses the terms defined in [draft-gu-ppsp-tracker-protocol]

   The draft also uses some new terms, as defined below.

   Piece: equivalent to Chunk, a basic unit of partitioned stream, which
   is used by a peer for the purpose of storage, advertisement and
   exchange among peers.  As the term "Piece" has been widely used in
   the literature, Piece and Chunk are used interchangably in this
   draft.

   Unchoking: uploading data to a selected peer in a P2P system.

   Rarest First: When selecting which piece to start downloading next,
   peers generally download pieces which the fewest of their own peers
   have first

   Free Riding: downloading data from peers without uploading any data
   to peers.

   Tit-for-Tat: peers exchange chunks preferentially with other peers
   with whom they have successfully exchanged chunks in the past at high



Zeng                    Expires December 31, 2010               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft          Pro-incentive Parameters               June 2010


   bandwidth

   Discount Parameter: the weight of the next move compared to the
   current one.  It measures the degree to which the payoff of each move
   is discounted relative to the previous move.

   Honest Piece Revelation: peers truthfully reveal which pieces they
   have.

   Under-Reporting: peers not revealing some pieces they have in order
   to make profit.


3.  Incentives in P2P Systems

   Several works have demonstrated the limitations of P2P protocols in
   the presence of selfish or malicious users [RobustIncentives, Free-
   riding].  Rewarding peer contributions has been suggested to overcome
   these limitations, e.g., in [ContributionAware, RobustIncentives].  A
   well known example is the tit-for-tat mechanism used in BitTorrent
   [BitTorrent].

3.1.  Measurement of peer contribution

   A typical metric for measuring peer's contribution is the amount of
   upload a peer has contributed.  For example, BitTorrent uses a
   bilateral mechanism called tit-for-tat.  The amount of data a peer
   would upload to another peer depends on how much it has downloaded
   from that peer in the past.

   Despite its pro-incentive approach, recent study [prTorrent] has
   empirically shown that BitTorrent is vulnerable to strategic
   manipulation by its constituent peers in a swarm.  For example, the
   Discount Parameter (DP) attack is an incentive threat that exploits
   the core of BitTorrent cooperation - the tit-for-tat based unchoking.
   The weight (or importance) of the next move compared to the current
   is called Discount Parameter, because it measures the degree to which
   the payoff of each move is discounted relative to the previous move.
   If the DP is small, peers might defect and not worry about future
   consequences.  In BitTorrent-like file sharing systems, piece rarity
   is a DP.  This means if the pieces available for download to peer B
   from A are not lucrative enough (possibly because B can get them from
   somewhere else at cheaper uploads, i.e. the piece rarity of pieces
   that A holds are low), then B has sufficient incentive to defect.
   Defect would mean that B will not upload to A in the "tat" phase,
   denying A one round of legitimate download.  Then B will break
   connection with A, leaving A with no opportunity to snub him.




Zeng                    Expires December 31, 2010               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft          Pro-incentive Parameters               June 2010


   Moreover, Honest Piece Revelation and Free-Riding is becoming an
   increasing concern.  As explained in [BTAuction], Honest Piece
   Revelation is not enforced in BitTorrent and peers have sufficient
   incentive to stray from truthfulness.  The results in [BTAuction]
   indicate that selfish BitTorrent clients can benefit from under-
   reporting pieces.  Under reported pieces keep getting rarer in the
   swarm and therefore, the demand of peers holding those pieces
   increases due to the rarest first piece selection approach.  It has
   been discovered in [prTorrent] that if a colluding group of peers are
   involved in under-reporting over a considerable period to improve
   their demand in the swarm, it might lead the whole swarm into
   premature starvation in which all peers have all the pieces of a
   file, except a few.

   The findings in [prTorrent] indicate that it is the orthogonal
   treatment of piece rarity and unchoking that has encouraged strategic
   manipulation enabling unfair maximization of incentives in p2p
   systems.  Note that BitTorrent uses rarest first approach for piece
   selection but not for peer selection (unchoking).  The prTorrent
   protocol [prTorrent] unifies a Piece Rarity factor with the
   BitTorrent Unchoking Algorithm, i.e., peer selection for unchoking
   not only depends on the uploading bandwidth of the candidate peers,
   but also how valuable the pieces they have uploaded are.  It is shown
   how strategic formulation of the Piece Rarity parameter can optimize
   incentives in a swarm, and help its constituent peers in achieving
   the equilibrium facilitating truly co-operative behavior.

   The Piece Rarity factor depends on a number of other variables
   measured at the piece, peer and swarm levels, as summarized below.

   o  the global availability (in all swarms of the tracker): the high
      availability of a piece outside the swarm may result in peers
      leaving the swarm.

   o  local availability (in the target swarm) of a piece: a rarer
      downloaded piece has more value to the swarm

   o  number of upload slots a candidate peer has: long term benefit can
      be expected from a peer with more uploading potential

   o  the completion factor (i.e., the ratio of the number of pieces of
      the file that a peer has to total number of pieces of that file)
      of the candidate peer: a peer with high completion factor is a
      good one to maintain a good upload/download relation with.

   o  the contention in the swarm (i.e., the ratio of total number of
      peers to total number of seeds): high contention implies more
      strategic value of a piece.



Zeng                    Expires December 31, 2010               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft          Pro-incentive Parameters               June 2010


   Several studies (e.g., [RobustIncentives, Incentives, Peer-assisted])
   however have pointed out the limitations of bilateral mechanisms
   (e.g., in the case of asymmetry of interest), and make the case for
   designing more global contribution-aware mechanisms.  This is
   especially an issue in real-time streaming.  Many systems that
   distribute content with the help of P2P overlays measure peer
   contribution and incentivize participation.  Peers who contribute
   more are rewarded with better performance via different mechanisms
   such as higher priority in the distribution overlay (e.g.,
   [ContributionAware, Collusion]) or priority service through server-
   assisted downloads (e.g., [CooperativeCD]), or discount coupons
   [CooperativeCD]).  Such systems are referred to as contribution aware
   peer-assisted content distribution systems.  A typical metric to
   measure peer's contribution to the swarm is again the amount of
   upload a peer has contributed to the swarm (as opposed to individual
   peers).


4.  Pro-incentive Protocol Parameters

   The above analysis suggests that it is important for a p2p streaming
   protocol to support the exchange/report of necessary information
   based on which a p2p streaming system can optimize incentives in a
   swarm to provide robust and improved services.  Some of the basic
   pro-incentive parameters are listed below.

   o  no_upload_slots: a peer's upload bandwidth (i.e., number of upload
      slots a peer has).

   o  bytes_uploaded: total amount of data that a peer has uploaded

   o  bytes_downloaded: total amount of data that has been downloaded
      from a peer

   o  chunk_nos: total number of chunks of a file that a peer has.

   o  seed_nos: total number of seeds.

   o  peer_nos: total number of peers.

   o  chunk_copies_swarm: chunk availability, i.e., total number of
      copies of a chunk available in the swarm.

   Exchanges of these parameters between tracker and peers SHALL be
   supported in the tracker protocol, e.g., through the methods defined
   in [draft-gu-ppsp-tracker-protocol].  A subset, e.g., a peer's
   no_upload_slots and the chunk_nos of a file that a peer has, SHOULD
   be supported in the peer protocol.  Some of these parameters (e.g.,



Zeng                    Expires December 31, 2010               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft          Pro-incentive Parameters               June 2010


   no_upload_slots) may have already been specified in
   [draft-gu-ppsp-tracker-protocol] for the purpose of facilitating
   optimization of the system performance.


5.  Acknowledgements

   The author would like to thank the following people for their help
   and comments: Robins George and Yingjie Gu.


6.  IANA Considerations

   This draft includes no request to IANA.


7.  Security Considerations

   Trustworthiness of these pro-incentive parameters is critical to the
   effectiveness of the incentive mechanisms.  Security will be
   considered in future versions of this draft.


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

8.2.  Informative References

   [BTAuction]
              D. Levin, K. LaCurts, N. Spring, and B. Bhattacharjee,
              "BitTorrent is an Auction: Analyzing and Improving
              BitTorrent's Incentives", ACM Special Interest Group on
              Data Communication, 2008.

   [BitTorrent]
              B. Cohen, "Incentives build robustness in BitTorrent", in
              Proc. of P2P-Econ, Berkeley, California, USA, June 2003.

   [Collusion]
              Q. Lian, Z. Zhang, M. Yang, B. Y. Zhao, Y. Dai, and X. Li,
              "An empirical study of collusion behavior in the Maze P2P
              file-sharing system", In Proc. ICDCS, 2007.

   [ContributionAware]



Zeng                    Expires December 31, 2010               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft          Pro-incentive Parameters               June 2010


              Y. Sung, M. Bishop, and S. Rao, "Enabling Contribution
              Awareness in an Overlay Broadcasting System", In Proc. ACM
              SIGCOMM, 2006.

   [CooperativeCD]
              M. Sirivianos, J. H. Park, X. Yang, and S. Jarecki,
              "Dandelion: Cooperative Content Distribution with Robust
              Incentives", In Proc. USENIX ATC, 2007.

   [Free-riding]
              M. Sirivianos, J. H. Park, R. Chen, and X. Yang, "Free-
              riding in BitTorrent networks with the large view
              exploit", In Proc. IPTPS, 2007.

   [Incentives]
              K. Lai, M. Feldman, I. Stoica, and J. Chuang, "Incentives
              for cooperation in peer-to-peer networks", In Proc. P2P
              Econ, 2004.

   [Peer-assisted]
              C. Aperjis, M. J. Freedman, and R. Johari, "Peer-Assisted
              Content Distribution with Prices", In Proc. CoNeXT, 2008.

   [RobustIncentives]
              M. Feldman, K. Lai, I. Stoica, and J. Chuang, "Robust
              Incentive Techniques for Peer-to-Peer Networks", In Proc.
              ACM EC, 2004.

   [draft-gu-ppsp-tracker-protocol]
              Gu, Y., Bryan, D., Zhang, Y., and H. Liao, "Tracker
              Protocol", (IETF Work in Progress) February 2010, <http://
              tools.ietf.org/html/draft-gu-ppsp-tracker-protocol-00>.

   [prTorrent]
              Roy, S. D.  and W. Zeng, "prTorrent: On Establishment of
              Piece Rarity in the BitTorrent Unchoking Algorithm",
              International Conference on Peer-to-Peer Computing
              (P2P2009), September 2009.













Zeng                    Expires December 31, 2010               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft          Pro-incentive Parameters               June 2010


Author's Address

   Wenjun Zeng
   Huawei Technologies
   US

   Phone: +1 214 538 7823
   Email: zengw@huawei.com











































Zeng                    Expires December 31, 2010               [Page 9]


