


Internet Engineering Task Force                              M. Townsley
Internet-Draft                                                  O. Troan
Intended status: Informational                                     cisco
Expires: June 14, 2012                                 December 12, 2011


  Basic Requirements for IPv6 Customer Edge Routers - multihoming and
                               transition
             draft-townsley-troan-ipv6-ce-transitioning-01

Abstract

   This document specifies general IPv6 multihoming and specific 6rd
   transitioning requirements for an IPv6 Customer Edge (CE) router.

Status of this Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on June 14, 2012.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2011 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.





Townsley & Troan          Expires June 14, 2012                 [Page 1]

Internet-Draft         IPv6 CE router requirements         December 2011


1.  Introduction

   This document defines transitioning and multihoming IPv6 features for
   a residential or small office router referred to as an IPv6 CE
   router.  Typically these routers also support IPv4.

1.1.  Requirements Language

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
   document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 [RFC2119].


2.  Terminology

   SRIB                      A Source Address Routing Information Base
                             containing an entry per delegated prefix.
                             Each entry points to one or more
                             Destination Address Routing Tables (DRIB).

   DRIB                      A Destination Address Routing Information
                             Base used for destination address longest
                             matching lookups.  Each entry points to one
                             or more next-hops.


3.  IPv6 Multi-Prefix Multihoming

   A multihomed, multiprefix, IPv6 CE router has multiple WAN interfaces
   connecting it to one or more Service Providers.  The interfaces may
   be "real" or "virtual" in the case of tunneling technology such as
   6rd.  The CE router receives one or more delegated prefixes, each
   associated with one or more WAN interfaces.  The CE router has a
   single SRIB, and one DRIB associated with each WAN Interface.

   WAN interfaces are used to send Ingress traffic from the Internet to
   the End-User, and Egress traffic from the End-User network to the
   Internet.  Ingress traffic may be received on any active interface at
   any time.  Egress traffic follows a set of rules within the CE in
   order to choose the proper WAN interface.  This is important not only
   in order to choose the best path, but also because the networks that
   the CE are connected to typically employ source address verification
   mechanisms.

   Packets arriving at the CE have an IPv6 source address chosen by the
   host [RFC3484].  The SRIB contains an entry for each delegated prefix
   with a pointer to one or more DRIBs.  A longest matching lookup based
   upon the source address of each arriving packet is performed within



Townsley & Troan          Expires June 14, 2012                 [Page 2]

Internet-Draft         IPv6 CE router requirements         December 2011


   the SRIB to determine the DRIB(s).  The egress WAN interface to use
   for sending a packet is then chosen by performing a longest matching
   lookup within the resulting DRIB(s).

   Multihoming requirements:

   MH-1:  An IPv6 CE router MUST create a separate DRIB for each WAN
          interface (real or virtual) and installs a route for the
          associated delegated prefix, default route and more specific
          routes.

   MH-2:  An IPv6 CE router MUST create an SRIB containing entries for
          associated delegated prefixes.  Each entry points to one or
          more DRIBs.  An entry points to multiple DRIBs only in the
          case where an identical delegated prefix is associated with
          multiple WAN interfaces.

   MH-3:  When forwarding a packet from a LAN interface, the CE router
          MUST do a longest matching lookup based on the packet's Source
          Address in the SRIB.  A Destination Address lookup is then
          performed in the corresponding DRIB or DRIBs.  When there are
          multiple equal matches, the route with the lowest cost is
          chosen.


4.  6rd Sunsetting Requirements

   6RDS-1:  Multihoming as defined in section Section 3 MUST be
            supported, allowing 6rd and native packets to be sent and
            received as long as 6rd configuration is provided by the
            ISP.

   6RDS-2:  By default, the 6rd virtual interface MUST be assigned a
            higher routing cost than a native IPv6 interface.

   6RDS-3:  The IPv6 CE router MUST support that 6rd and native IPv6
            delegated prefixes are identical or different, and operate
            as defined in the multihoming section.


5.  Security Considerations


6.  Acknowledgements







Townsley & Troan          Expires June 14, 2012                 [Page 3]

Internet-Draft         IPv6 CE router requirements         December 2011


7.  IANA Considerations

   This memo includes no request to IANA.


8.  References

8.1.  Normative References

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119, March 1997.

   [RFC2131]  Droms, R., "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol",
              RFC 2131, March 1997.

   [RFC5969]  Townsley, W. and O. Troan, "IPv6 Rapid Deployment on IPv4
              Infrastructures (6rd) -- Protocol Specification",
              RFC 5969, August 2010.

8.2.  Informative References

   [RFC3484]  Draves, R., "Default Address Selection for Internet
              Protocol version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 3484, February 2003.

   [RFC6204]  Singh, H., Beebee, W., Donley, C., Stark, B., and O.
              Troan, "Basic Requirements for IPv6 Customer Edge
              Routers", RFC 6204, April 2011.


Authors' Addresses

   Mark Townsley
   cisco


   Email:


   Ole Troan
   cisco


   Email:








Townsley & Troan          Expires June 14, 2012                 [Page 4]

